Accelerando:

Accelerando (Italian: becoming faster) is a term in general use to show that the music should be played at an increasing speed. 


Accompaniment:

An accompaniment is an additional part of any kind that is less important than another, which it serves to support and enhance. The piano is often used to provide an accompaniment to a solo singer. In works for, say, violin and piano the role may be swapped between the instruments.


Adagio:

Adagio (Italian: slow) is an indication of tempo and is sometimes used to describe a slow movement, even when the indication of speed at the start of the movement may be different. The diminutive form adagietto is a little faster than adagio.


Affections:

The  so-called Doctrine of Affections, in Italian affetti, indicates  the Baroque theory, derived from Greek and Roman rhetorical theory and  practice, according to which one piece of music should aim to bring about a  certain state of feeling in the hearer, of sadness, joy, anger (in the musical  representation of which Monteverdi claimed to be a pioneer) or love. The  original affetti developed in the 17th and early 18th centuries to cover  a relatively wide range of human emotions and this had a clear effect on  operatic requirements. The opera seria of the first half of the 18th  century came to require a variety of arias for the principal singers, who would  then be able to show their ability in expressing sorrow or anger, with other  emotions.


Air:

An  air (ayre) is a song. The word is used by earlier English composers and has its  counterpart in French usage.


Alla:

The Italian alla means ‘in the manner of’ (= French: à la) and may be found in titles like that of Mozart’s Rondo alla turca (‘Rondo in the Turkish Style’).


Allegro:

Allegro (Italian: cheerful, lively) is generally taken to mean fast, although not as fast as vivace or presto. Allegretto is a diminutive, meaning slightly slower than allegro. These indications of speed or tempo are used as general titles for pieces of music (usually movements within larger works) that are headed by instructions of this kind. The first movement of a Classical sonata, for example, is often ‘an Allegro’, just as the slow movement is often ‘an Adagio’.


Allemande:

An allemande is a German dance (the word itself is French) in 4/4 time, often the first dance in a Baroque dance suite, where it is frequently followed by a courante, a more rapid dance. The allemande, which appears in earlier English sources often as alman, almain or with similar spellings, is generally moderate in speed.


Alto:

The  alto (Italian: high) is the lower female or unbroken male voice at a pitch  below that of the soprano and above that of the tenor. For female singers at  this pitch, the term contralto is preferred.


Andante:

Andante (Italian: walking) is used to indicate that the music should be played at walking pace. The diminutive andantino is ambiguous and means either a little faster or a little slower than andante, more often the former.


Anthem:

An anthem is a short vocal composition. In the Church of England the word indicates such a composition often using a non-liturgical text (i.e. not part of the official service). A full anthem is for full choir, without soloists, while a verse anthem makes contrasting use of solo singers. Both these forms flourished in the Church of England from the late 16th century.


Arabesque:

The word arabesque originally indicated a decorative pattern in Arab style found in painting or architecture. Its most common use in music has been as a descriptive title of short decorative piano pieces of the 19th or early 20th century. There are two well-known arabesques by the French composer Debussy.


Arco:

Arco (Italian: bow) is used as an indication to string players that they should use the bow, rather than pluck with the fingers (see ‘Pizzicato’).


Aria:

The  word aria is the equivalent of the English air, in its most literal meaning. In  opera it came to mean a separate song, usually for one voice, and  distinguished, by the later 17th century, from recitative, which resembles  heightened speech.
There  are various forms of aria. These include the da capo aria (‘from  the beginning’ aria), originating in opera in the early 18th century. Here the  singer repeats the first section of an aria, with appropriate additional  ornamentation, to make a three-section lyrical form, with a generally  contrasted middle section. This was not always dramatically suitable.
The dal segno aria (‘from  the sign’ aria) is similar to the da capo aria, except that the  repetition is from a sign in the earlier part of the score, not from the  beginning. Both forms of aria would include instrumental introductions,  conclusions and interruptions, the so-called ritornello, and might well involve  further repetition of the sections.
The  aria in one form or another, as a solo set-piece, has continued to have a place  in opera, but it is, essentially, a closed form, with an element of  completeness in itself. The allocation of arias between rival singers and the  necessary nature of these arias was often a matter of great importance. In the  formal opera of the first half of the 18th century, entrances and exits needed  to excite interest and applause from the audience.


Arietta:

A short aria.


Ariette:

Originally  the French form of the Italian arietta, the word ariette came to  signify a particular form of short aria, of lively character. The word is used  in the descriptive title of French comic operas in the later 18th century, comédie  mêlée d’ariettes, dialogue interspersed with songs.


Assai:

Assai (Italian: very) appears often in speed indications to performers, as in allegro assai (very fast).


Atonal:

Atonal music is music that has no specific tonality – i.e. it is not in a specific key and therefore has no specific ‘home’ note or chord. The word atonality refers technically to various forms of 20th-century music not in a key.


Aubade:

An aubade is a morning song. A well-known example is the Siegfried Idyll, a work written by Richard Wagner to be played for his second wife Cosima on the morning of her birthday.


Badinerie:

Badinerie (French: teasing) indicates a piece of music of light-hearted character. The best-known badinerie is the lively last movement of Bach’s Suite in B minor for flute, strings and continuo.


Bagatelle:

Bagatelle, used as the title of a short light-hearted piece of music, was employed most notably by Beethoven in a series of such compositions for piano. The descriptive title was thereafter used by a number of other composers.


Bagpipe:

The bagpipe is an ancient instrument, at least in its most primitive form, and is still found in a number of countries. It is a reed instrument, with the reed sounded by air expressed from a leather bag. It generally makes use of a single pipe that can be fingered to produce different notes, along with additional drones—pipes that produce single notes, a marked feature of bagpipe music and of its imitations for other instruments. The sophisticated and more versatile French musette, a bagpipe operated by bellows, gave its name to a Baroque dance-suite movement, marked, usually in the bass, by the continuing sound of a drone (a repeated single note).


Ballad:

Ballad, derived from the late Latin verb ballare (to dance), came to be used primarily to describe a folksong of narrative character or a song or poem written in imitation of such a folksong. The title Ballade was used by Chopin to describe four piano pieces of otherwise concealed narrative content, apparently based on narrative poems of ballad type by the patriotic poet Mickiewicz, while Brahms in one of his ballades transfers into music an old Scottish narrative ballad. The ballade of French music and poetry of the 14th and 15th centuries denotes a different and fixed literary and musical form.


Ballad opera:

Ballad  opera is the form of English musical and dramatic entertainment that offers a  play, usually comic, interspersed with songs set to popular tunes, whether  traditional or borrowed from current operas or other repertoire. The form seems  to have started in England in 1728 with John Gay’s The Beggar’s  Opera. This had possible, if less satisfactory, predecessors in the  previous century, but itself essentially provoked a new genre, developed  particularly by the dramatist and novelist Henry Fielding.


Ballata:

Derived  from the Italian ballare (to dance), the word ballata has  connection also with ballad, a narrative song. In opera it is used to indicate  a dance-like song or a sung narrative.


Ballet:

Ballet, the art of dance and  mime, has held an important place in opera, providing an element of spectacle  and of variety, and found in the earliest period of operatic history, in  particular with the court masque. The place of ballet in France was of  particular importance, at one time of symbolic significance in supporting the  power of the monarch. In later periods ballet continued to be an essential  element in French opera, leading, in some cases, to the addition of a ballet to  make a foreign opera more acceptable to the Parisian public.


Ballet-héroïque:

The ballet-héroïque was a form that developed in France in  the second and third quarters of the 18th century. Generally celebratory in tone  and purpose, the genre involved heroic figures in a series of episodes based on  a general theme. Rameau was the principle exponent of a form of distinct  political relevance in its own time.


Bar:

In written Western music the bar-line came to be used: a vertical line through the stave, to mark metrical units or bars (= measures). By the later 17th century the bar-line would precede a strong beat, so that a bar came to begin normally with an accented note. The double bar or double bar-line marks the end of a section or piece.


Barcarolle:

A barcarolle (= Italian: barcarola)  is a boating-song, generally with a characteristic swaying rhythm. The  best-known operatic example is found in Offenbach’s Les Contes d’Hoffmann (‘The  Tales of Hoffmann’), setting the scene in Venice.


Baritone:

The word baritone indicates a male voice that  is lower than tenor and higher than bass. The range corresponds to that of the  normal male speaking voice. In fact the baritone range can vary very  considerably, leading to a necessary distinction between high baritone and  bass-baritone. Operatic repertoire includes a number of leading baritone roles,  from Mozart’s Don Giovanni to the dramatically and technically demanding parts  offered by Verdi in operas like Rigoletto or Falstaff.


Baroque:

Once used as a term of critical disapproval, the word Baroque is now used in music to designate a period of musical history from about 1600 to about 1750, although any such periodisation in history can only be a rough guide. In musicology the term was borrowed from the history of art and architecture. In music the Baroque era may conveniently be divided into three 50-year periods: early Baroque, middle Baroque and late Baroque. The first of these is typified by the Italian composer Monteverdi, the middle Baroque by composers such as Henry Purcell in England or Lully in France, and the late Baroque by Johann Sebastian Bach, Handel and Vivaldi.


Bass:

The word bass describes the lower register and lower sonorities in music. In vocal music it indicates the lowest type of male voice, and in instrumental music it is generally used to indicate the bottom part. As an adjective it is used to describe instruments of lower register, such as the bass clarinet. In common speech the word bass may indicate the double bass, the largest and lowest instrument of the string family, or, in brass bands, an instrument corresponding to the orchestral tuba (the bass of the brass family).


Bass (voice):

The bass is the lowest male voice, originally  cast in majestic roles like those of Plutone, King of the Underworld, or of  Caronte (Charon), sinister ferryman of the dead, in Monteverdi’s Orfeo.  Composers sometimes call for a wide range of voice, rising from the depths to  the heights. In French opera of the 19th century distinctions were made between  types of bass, according to the character and range of the roles, whether noble  or lyrical.


Bass-baritone:

The bass-baritone voice lies between baritone  and bass and there are roles that may be allocated to a bass-baritone instead  of to a bass. Such roles include that of Boris Godunov in Mussorgsky’s opera  and a number of roles deliberately allotted by Wagner to a ‘high bass’.


Basso buffo:

The basso buffo is the comic bass, as  exemplified by the comic slave overseer Osmin, in Mozart’s Die Entführung  aus dem Serail (‘The Abduction from the Seraglio’), or by Donizetti’s Don  Pasquale.


Basso cantante:

A basso  cantante (= French: basse chantante) is a singing  bass, a bass singing a more lyrical melodic line, as, perhaps, in the title  role of Mussorgsky’s Boris Godunov.


Basso continuo:

The basso continuo or continuo is the figured bass commonly used in music of the Baroque period. It was the normal practice to make use of a bass instrument of some kind (for example a cello or bass viola da gamba) and a chordal instrument (a keyboard instrument or plucked string instrument). The part of the latter is indicated by numbers added to the bass instrument’s part; these show the basic chords, or harmony, on which can be improvised a more elaborate accompaniment or ‘filling in’.


Basso profondo:

The basso  profondo is a deep bass, of rich lower sonority, the kind of bass for which  Russia is well known. In opera the basso profondo is generally used for  roles of some solemnity, but the range demanded of Osmin in Mozart’s Die  Entführung aus dem Serail (‘The Abduction from the Seraglio’) qualifies him  for this description; his range is profondo in a role that is buffo.


Bassoon:

The bassoon is a double-reed wind instrument (= German: Fagott; Italian: fagotto). It is the bass of the woodwind section in the modern orchestra, which can be augmented by the use of a double bassoon of lower range.


Beat:

The beat or pulse in a piece of music is the regular rhythmic pattern of the music. Each bar should start with a strong beat and each bar should end with a weak beat. These may be known as the down-beat (strong, at the beginning of a bar) and the up-beat (weak, at the end of a bar). Up and down describe the gestures of a conductor, whose preparatory up-beat is of even greater importance to players than his down-beat.


Berceuse:

A berceuse is a cradle-song or lullaby, in lilting triple or compound time. The most famous example of the use of this title is by Chopin, who wrote one Berceuse, followed by Liszt.


Bewegt:

Bewegt (German: agitated) is used as a tempo indication with a similar meaning to the Italian agitato, although mässig bewegt is used as the equivalent of allegro moderato.


Bolero:

The bolero is a Spanish dance, popular in Paris in the time of Chopin and in Latin America. The best-known example of the dance in art music is Ravel’s ballet music Boléro, music of mounting intensity described by the composer as an orchestrated crescendo.


Bourrée:

A bourrée is a duple-rhythm French dance sometimes found in the Baroque dance suite, where it was later placed after the sarabande, with other lighter additional dances.


Brass:

The brass section of the orchestra comprises metal instruments on which the sound is produced by forcing air through a cup-shaped or conical mouthpiece. The brass section usually consists of trumpets, trombones, French horns and tuba.


Breeches role:

A  breeches role (= French: travesti; German: Hosenrolle) is  one in which a female singer takes a male part. This occurred, for example, in  the time of Handel, when leading male castrato parts were sometimes,  alternatively, allocated to women. Famous breeches roles must include that of  Octavian in Der Rosenkavalier (‘The Knight of the Rose’) and that of the  Composer in Ariadne auf Naxos by Richard Strauss, but operatic history  offers many more examples, from Monteverdi to Massenet.


Brio:

Brio (Italian: vivacity, fire or energy) appears as an instruction to performers; for example, allegro con brio, meaning fast with brilliance and fire, an indication used on a number of occasions by Beethoven.


Buffo:

Buffo describes a singer or a role that is comic.  The word is most often applied to the comic bass, the basso buffo, but  tenors are occasionally allowed to indulge in comedy, as, for example, in the  case of the tenore buffo Goro, the marriage-broker in Puccini’s Madama  Butterfly.


Burlesque:

A  burlesque (= Italian: burlesca; German: Burleske) is, in  its earlier meaning, a comic piece for the theatre, often including an element  of parody or caricature. The word is derived from the Italian burlare (to  make fun of) and performances of this kind were often used in seasonal  festivities to mock more serious theatrical works. In the United States of  America the term took on a markedly less respectable meaning from the later  19th century onwards.


Burletta:

Although  the word burletta was used in England from the late 18th  century for a form of light English opera, it had a use in Italy to indicate a  category of comic opera, during the same period. An example is found in  Rossini’s L’occasione fa il ladro (‘Opportunity Makes the Thief’).


Cabaletta:

A cabaletta, the word  used first in the earlier 19th century, is the second, quicker part of an  Italian aria in two parts. An example would be Rosina’s Io sono docile (I  am biddable), after her Una voce poco fa (A voice, a little while ago),  in Rossini’s Il barbiere di Siviglia (‘The Barber of Seville’). The word  can also describe the later part of an operatic duet.


Cadence:

A cadence usually consists of two chords that provide musical punctuation at the end of a phrase.


Cadenza:

A cadenza, based often on an extended and embellished final cadence, at least in Classical concertos, is a passage originally improvised by a performer in which virtuoso ability might be shown. Cadenzas are now more often written by the composer, although some modern performers continue to improvise. In Classical concertos the cadenza frequently leads to the last section of a movement.


Camera:

Camera (Italian: room, chamber) is found principally in the phrase sonata da camera (‘chamber sonata’), to be distinguished in music of the Baroque period from sonata da chiesa (‘church sonata’). The secular sonata da camera generally consists of dance movements.


Canon:

A canon in music is a device in counterpoint in which a melody announced by one voice or instrument is imitated by one or more other voices or instruments, entering after the first has started, in the manner of a round. The word canon may describe either the device as it occurs in a piece of music or a complete composition in this form, such as the well-known example by Pachelbel.


Cantabile:

The  Italian word cantabile means singable and is more usually found in  directions for instrumental performance in a singing manner. It has appeared  also as a noun to indicate the first part of a two-section Italian aria.


Cantata:

A cantata is generally a choral work of some length that also uses solo voices, usually with instrumental accompaniment. The texts used may be sacred or secular. Some cantatas use solo voices without chorus.


Canzone:

A canzone is a song. In opera the word  is used to indicate a song that appears as such in the dramatic context. An  example might be Cherubino’s song Voi che sapete (You who know what love  is) in Mozart’s Le nozze di Figaro (‘The Marriage of Figaro’).


Canzonetta:

A canzonetta is a little canzone.


Cappella:

Cappella (Italian: chapel) is found particularly in the phrase a cappella for unaccompanied choral singing. The words chapel, cappella and Kapelle indicate a musical establishment rather than a place, as in the English Chapel Royal (the musicians of the monarch). The spelling capella may also be found.


Capriccio, caprice:

Capriccio or caprice appears in a variety of musical meanings, used differently at different periods and by different composers. In the later 16th century and 17th century it generally indicated a fugal composition (see ‘Fugue’) but later came to signify dances or dance suites or any composition that allowed a relatively free play of fancy, as in the Capriccio espagnol (‘Spanish Caprice’) of Rimsky-Korsakov or the Capriccio italien (‘Italian Caprice’) of Tchaikovsky.


Cassation:

The word cassation is of disputed origin and was used principally in the third quarter of the 18th century in South Germany to describe a piece of music akin to a divertimento or serenade, music intended primarily for entertainment. Mozart uses the word to describe three of his own serenades.


Castrato:

The castrato, the castrated male singer, held  a position of essential importance in opera of the 17th and 18th centuries, in  particular in Italian works. Many principal male roles in Italian Baroque opera  were allocated to male sopranos or altos, who enjoyed great fame and high fees.  Outstanding castrato singers include Farinelli, whose career flourished in the  1720s and 1730s. The castrato voice went out of fashion during the later 18th  century, although there are rare and isolated castrato roles in operas by  Rossini and Meyerbeer.


Cavatina:

A cavatina is a short aria, an example of which,  so specified, would be Figaro’s Se vuol ballare (If you want to dance)  in Mozart’s Le nozze di Figaro (The Marriage of Figaro). In Italian  opera of the 19th century it came to indicate an opening aria for a leading  character or an aria of particular virtuosity.


Celesta:

A celesta (= French: céleste) is a small keyboard instrument developed in the later 19th century which uses hammers that strike metal bars to give a ringing sound. Tchaikovsky used the celesta, then a new instrument, in ‘Dance of the Sugar-Plum Fairy’ (part of his ballet The Nutcracker).


Cello:

The word cello is now in general use instead of the longer word violoncello; the latter means ‘little violone’, violone indicating the big viol—the lowest-pitched instrument of the bowed viol family. The cello normally plays the bass line of the string section in an orchestra, its register the approximate equivalent of the lowest male voice (the bass).


Cembalo:

(see ‘Harpsichord’)


Chaconne:

A chaconne (= Italian: ciaconna; earlier English: chacony) is in origin a dance popular in Spain in the early 17th century. It came to signify a form comprising a series of variations over a short repeated bass or chordal pattern. Famous examples of the form are found in Bach’s Chaconne for unaccompanied violin in his D minor Partita or the earlier Chacony in G minor by Henry Purcell.


Chamber music:

Chamber music is music for a small ensemble of instruments, generally intended for performance in a room or chamber, as opposed to a church or larger building.


Chamber orchestra:

A chamber orchestra has come to indicate an orchestra smaller in size than the usual symphony orchestra.


Chanson:

A chanson is a French song. The word is used to indicate songs from the troubadour compositions of the Middle Ages to the art songs of the 19th and 20th centuries.


Chant:

(see ‘Plainchant’ and ‘Gregorian Chant’)


Chapel:

The word chapel (= Latin: cappella, capella; French: chapelle; German: Kapelle) signifies, in the ordinary sense, a place of worship. In music it may be used to indicate a group of musicians employed by the Church or by the court, as in the English Chapel Royal (the group of musicians employed by the English monarch), or, in later continental terminology, any musical establishment.


Choir:

A choir is a group of singers. The word is generally used to indicate a) such a group in a church; b) the part of the church in which such a group is normally placed.


Chorale:

A chorale is a German Lutheran hymn tune, a number of which were composed or arranged by Luther himself and adapted in later centuries to various harmonies, the most famous of all by Johann Sebastian Bach. The word is also used in America to signify a choir or chorus.


Chorale prelude:

The chorale prelude (an introduction to a chorale) was developed in 17th-century Germany as an organ composition based on a chorale melody. The form is found in the later 17th century in the work of Buxtehude and in the early 18th century most notably in the 45 chorale preludes of Johann Sebastian Bach.


Chord:

A chord is the simultaneous sounding of two or more notes. The adjective is ‘chordal’. The study of harmony involves the correct placing of chords with relation to each other.


Chorus:

A chorus is a group of singers, the term often interchangeable with ‘choir’. The word is also used to indicate a refrain in a song.


Chromatic:

Chromatic notes are those which do not belong to the diatonic scale. If an ascending major scale is taken from the note C, chromatic notes would be C sharp, D sharp, etc. – i.e. notes not found in the diatonic scale of C major, which has no sharps or flats.


Clarinet:

A clarinet is a woodwind instrument with a single reed (as opposed to the oboe, for example, which has a double reed). The clarinet was developed from the year 1800 onwards from the earlier chalumeau, which played notes only in the lower register. The new instrument added notes in the higher register. Clarinets are built in different keys, most commonly in B flat and in A.


Clarino:

Clarino was the word often used in the 17th and 18th centuries for trumpet. It now describes the upper register of the trumpet, much used in the Baroque period, when the trumpet, lacking valves, could produce successive notes only in the highest register (an art that later fell into temporary disuse).


Classical:

In the most general meaning of the word, classical music may designate fine music or serious music. More technically the word may refer to a period in the history of music, roughly from 1750 to 1830: the age of Haydn, Mozart and Beethoven. In this sense, the Classical may be differentiated from the so-called Romantic—producing the relatively experimental and less formally restricted kinds of music that became current in the 19th century.


Clavichord:

The clavichord is a small early keyboard instrument with a hammer action. The strings are struck by a ‘tangent’: a small oblong strip of metal, eliciting a soft sound. The limited dynamic range of the clavichord makes it unsuitable for public performance, but it was historically much favoured by composers such as Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach, second son of Johann Sebastian Bach and a leading keyboard player in the mid-18th century.


Clef:

The five lines generally used in modern musical notation have no precise meaning without the addition at the left-hand side of a clef: a sign that specifies a particular note to be indicated by one of the lines, from which other notes may be gauged. The treble clef, otherwise known as a G clef, is used to show that the second line from the bottom is G. The bass clef, otherwise known as an F clef, shows that the second line from the top is the F below middle C. C clefs are used on any line to show the position of the note known as middle C; most frequently found are the alto clef, a C clef on the middle line of the stave (the group of five lines) and the tenor clef, a C clef on the second line from the top. The alto clef is the principal clef used for the viola, the tenor of the string family, while the tenor clef is used for the upper register of instruments like the cello and the bassoon. In plainchant, which uses a four-line stave, there are C clefs and F clefs which may appear on any line.


Coda:

A coda (Italian: tail) is the ending of a piece of music. This may be very short, but in a composition on a large scale it may be extended. The diminutive codetta may be used to indicate the closing part of a section of a composition.


Coloratura:

In its earlier meaning coloratura signifies  colouring, and, in music, ornamentation. The word now generally indicates a  role that includes elaborate ornamentation, or a singer specialising in such a  role. It often involves a high soprano in exploration of the musical  stratosphere. A well-known example is found in the role of the Queen of the  Night in Mozart’s Die Zauberflöte (‘The Magic Flute’), with her dazzling  vocal acrobatics.


Comédie lyrique • Comédie en musique:

Lyric comedy, comedy in  music, comedy set to music, are terms applied to French operas of the later  18th century that are to be distinguished from the tragédie lyrique of the period. It represents a form that has less dramatic pretensions  than lyric tragedy but rather more than the comédie mêlée d’ariettes.


Comédie mêlée d’ariettes:

‘Comedy mingled with little  arias’ was a form that gained currency in France in the second half of the 18th  century. The musical element, in the shorter songs involved, is relatively  simple and straightforward.


Comédie-ballet:

The French Baroque comédie-ballet makes  use of spoken dialogue, song and dance. A well-known example of the form is  found in Molière’s collaboration with the composer Lully in Le Bourgeois  gentilhomme (‘The Bourgeois Gentleman’).


Comédie larmoyante:

The French comédie larmoyante (tearful  comedy) became fashionable in France in the later 18th century, providing a  plot in which a tearful element leads to a happy ending. The genre has wider  cultural connection with novels such as Samuel Richardson’s Pamela, or  Virtue Rewarded and with the German Empfindsamerstil (sentimental  style).


Commedia dell’arte:

The conventions of the  semi-improvised Italian commedia dell’arte, with its stock characters of  Harlequin, Pantaloon and Columbine, are reflected in early opera until the  middle of the 18th century, and beyond that in the plays by Gozzi, sources of  later operatic exploitation. The character of Harlequin (Arlecchino),  protagonist of Busoni’s opera of that name, is that of the ordinary man, set,  time and again, in inappropriately exotic or majestic surroundings, which he  then brings into ridicule. His German equivalent is found in Hanswurst and then  in characters such as Mozart’s bird-catcher Papageno in Die Zauberflöte (‘The  Magic Flute’). Shakespeare’s Bottom in fairy-land explores much the same vein of  humour. The characters and the genre of the commedia dell’arte continue  to have their place, as, for example, in the opera Ariadne auf Naxos (‘Ariadne  on Naxos’) by Richard Strauss.


Comprimario:

Comprimario roles are  operatic roles of secondary or even lesser importance, however vital their  existence may be to a plot.


Concertante:

A concertante part in a piece of music is a part that calls for some element of solo performance, as in a Classical concerto. The word is found in the phrase Sinfonia concertante, a title used from the late 18th century onwards to indicate an orchestral composition with two or more solo instruments. 


Concertino:

A concertino is a small group of solo instruments used in a concerto grosso, in contrast to the whole body of the orchestra—the ripieno players (see ‘Concerto grosso’). A concertino may also be a small concerto (see Concerto).


Concerto:

A concerto is a piece of instrumental music that contrasts a solo instrument or a small group of solo instruments with the main body of the orchestra. In the earlier 17th century the word had a more general significance, but in the early 18th century it came to mean primarily a work thus described.


Concerto grosso:

The concerto grosso developed towards the end of the 17th century, particularly with the works in this form by Corelli, followed by Handel and many other composers. A small group of soloists, often two violins, cello and harpsichord (the concertino), is contrasted with the whole string orchestra—the ripieno players. The concerto grosso may involve wind instruments as well as strings. The form has been revived by some 20th-century composers, at least nominally.


Consort:

Consort, used in earlier English, indicates a group of instruments—as, for example, a consort of viols in the late 16th and early 17th centuries. A broken consort is a consort of mixed instruments—strings and wind.


Continuo:

A continuo part, a regular feature of much instrumental music in the 17th and 18th centuries, was the part played by a keyboard player or performer on a chordal instrument, such as a lute or harp. The music comprised the bass line of a composition, generally with numbers to indicate the choice of chords, which the player would then fill out, with other melodic and contrapuntal embellishments. The continuo or basso continuo was a necessary part of instrumental music, but it gradually fell into disuse towards the end of the 18th century, while remaining an important element in the accompaniment of operatic recitative.


Contralto:

The contralto voice is the  lowest female voice, now often identified with the mezzo-soprano. It is,  however, possible to distinguish between the two types of voice and the kinds  of roles allotted to them in opera. A  characteristic contralto role is that of Tancredi in Rossini’s opera of that  name, a breeches part that demands a rich lower register, as well as the usual  vocal agility. In general, however, the contralto has had to be content as a  mother, mother-in-law or nurse, or as any other female of formidable power or  sinister suggestion, such as the gypsy Azucena in Verdi’s Il trovatore (‘The Troubadour’), which might properly  be thought to belong to a mezzo-soprano, because of the part’s slightly higher  range.


Cor anglais:

The cor anglais is the ‘English horn’: a tenor oboe that sounds a fifth lower than it is written. 


Cornet:

The cornet is a valved brass instrument, resembling a trumpet but with a wider bore. It was used in the second quarter of the 19th century before the full development of the valved trumpet, but is now principally found in brass bands.


Cornetto:

The cornetto or cornett is a wind instrument made of wood or ivory, or nowadays reproduced in fibre-glass. It has a cup-shaped mouthpiece, like other brass instruments, but finger-holes, like a recorder. It was much used in the 17th and earlier 18th centuries, often to support or even replace treble voices. The bass of the cornetto family is the serpent, once found in village church bands in England and now revived.


Counterpoint:

Counterpoint is the combination of two or more melodic lines, the second or later additional melodies described as counterpoints to the first. If harmony is regarded as vertical, as it is in conventional notation, signifying the simultaneous sounding of notes in chords, counterpoint may be regarded as horizontal. The adjective from counterpoint is ‘contrapuntal’. The phrase ‘modal counterpoint’ indicates 16th-century counterpoint and the phrase ‘tonal counterpoint’ indicates the later Baroque counterpoint of Johann Sebastian Bach and his contemporaries.


Countertenor:

A countertenor voice is that of a male alto. Sometimes a distinction is made between the two, the second indicating the English falsetto tradition and the first a natural voice of similar range.


Courante:

The French courante, a triple-time dance movement found frequently in the Baroque dance suite, generally follows the allemande, the opening German dance. It is sometimes not distinguished from the Italian corrente, although the corrente is generally simpler in texture and rhythm than its French counterpart.


Crescendo:

Crescendo (Italian: growing, becoming louder) is frequently used as a dynamic instruction to performers.


Cycle:

A song cycle is a set of songs intended to be performed as a group, as in Schumann’s Dichterliebe (‘The Poet’s Love’) or Schubert’s Winterreise (‘Winter Journey’). The 19th-century Czech composer Smetana wrote a cycle of symphonic poems called Má vlast (‘My Country’).


Cymbals:

Cymbals (= Italian: piatti; German: Becken; French: cymbales) are pairs of round metal plates, generally made of an alloy of tin and copper, which may be struck together. A single cymbal may be suspended and struck with a hard or soft stick. The instrument is of ancient origin, but its more modern use occurs first principally in the later 18th century, as part of the Turkish music used, for example, by Mozart in his German opera Die Entführung aus dem Serail (‘The Abduction from the Seraglio’). It found much fuller and more varied use in the 19th and 20th centuries.


Da capo:

Da capo (Italian: from the beginning), abbreviated to the letters D.C. at the end of a piece of music or a section of it, means that it should be played or sung again from the beginning (Da capo al fine) or from the beginning up to the sign (Da capo al segno). A da capo aria, often found in the later Baroque period, is an aria in three sections, the third an ornamented repetition of the first.


Dal segno:

Dal segno (from the sign) is used as a direction  to performers to repeat a piece from a sign written above the music at some  point after the beginning. A dal segno aria is an aria with a repeated  element of this kind.


Decrescendo:

Decrescendo (Italian: growing less) is used as a direction to performers, meaning becoming softer.


Diminuendo:

Diminuendo (Italian: becoming less) is used as a direction to performers to play more softly.


Divertimento:

A divertimento is an instrumental composition intended for entertainment, usually in a number of movements. The term is used particularly in the second half of the 18th century. Haydn described his first string quartets as divertimenti and the title is also used by Mozart and other composers of the period.


Divertissement:

The French word divertissement is used in English principally to indicate the additional dance entertainment that is often a part of classical ballet. A well-known example would be the series of characteristic dances that entertain the heroine towards the end of Tchaikovsky’s Nutcracker.


Double bass:

The double bass is the largest and lowest of the orchestra’s string instruments. It has generally four or five strings and its music sounds an octave (eight notes) lower than it is written. If, as often in music before 1800, the double bass plays the same music as the cello, the sound will be an octave lower.


Double bassoon:

A double bassoon plays an octave lower than the bassoon.


Dramatic soprano:

The dramatic soprano voice is needed for  roles that make demands on the power and intensity of the soprano. Examples  would include the role of Isolde in Wagner’s Tristan und Isolde (‘Tristan  and Isolde’) and a number of other Wagnerian heroines. Sometimes lyrical  elements may predominate over the heroic, as in Tosca or in Cio-Cio-San (Madama  Butterfly), calling for a combination of the dramatic and the lyrical.


Drame lyrique:

The French drame lyrique (lyric drama)  was, from the 1750s until the early 19th century, a form of opera that dealt  seriously enough with characters of lower degree than the kings and demi-gods  of French tragédie lyrique. The term later came into very general use,  as, in the later 19th century, in Massenet’s Werther, with its  middle-class setting.


Dramma giocoso:

The dramma giocoso (cheerful drama) is  found principally in Italian opera of the 18th century and notably in libretti  by Carlo Goldoni. It indicates an opera that is, in general, comic, but  includes more serious roles. The librettist Lorenzo Da Ponte used the term for  his libretto for Mozart’s Don Giovanni.


Dramma per musica:

Dramma per musica (drama for  music) would appear to have been largely a term used by librettists for their  work, particularly in contributions to what became known as opera seria,  in the first part of the 18th century.


Drum:

The form of drum generally found in the orchestra is the kettledrum or, in incorrect Italian, timpani (incorrect in that the Italian singular timpano seldom appears in English usage). Other smaller and larger drums may also be used, including the snare drum, a smaller instrument with a vibrating strip that can be switched on or off, and the bass drum. Timpani are tunable, nowadays usually by means of pedals that loosen or tighten the drum-skin.


Duet:

A duet is part of  an opera intended for two voices. It has always been of importance in opera,  from Cavalieri’s duet for Body and Soul in his Rappresentatione di anima e  di corpo (‘Representation of Soul and Body’) in 1600 and  Monteverdi’s famous closing duet for Nero and Poppaea in L’incoronazione di Poppea (‘The Coronation of Poppaea’) to Sous  le dôme épais (‘Under the thick canopy of jasmine’) in Lakmé by  Delibes, with voices joined in mellifluous parallel. Examples of duets continue  in modern repertoire, often as expressions of love between the two singers.


Duo:

A duo is a piece of music for two performers. Written for the piano such a piece would need two performers and two pianos. It is also the name for a group of two players.


Dynamics:

Dynamics are the levels of sound, loud or soft, in a piece of music.


Echo:

The practical use of an echo effect,  sometimes by the sound of the goddess Echo herself, provided additional interest  in early Baroque opera. Well-known examples occur in Cavalieri’s Rappresentatione  di anima e di corpo (‘Representation of Soul and Body’), where Soul calls on  Heaven for an answer to her questions, which comes in syllables derived from  the last words of each question. There is a similar use of the device in the  fifth act of Monteverdi’s Orfeo, where Echo herself answers the  distraught Orpheus, his Eurydice now lost to him.


Elegy:

An elegy (= French: élégie) is a lament, either vocal or instrumental.


English horn:

(see ‘Cor anglais’)


Ensemble:

The word ensemble is used in three senses: it may indicate the togetherness of a group of performers (if ensemble is poor, the players are not together); it may indicate part of an opera that involves a group of singers; or it may mean a group of performers.


Entr’acte:

An entr’acte (= German: Zwischenspiel)  is an interlude between the acts or scenes of an opera or other such dramatic  and musical work. While the function of the entr’acte may be dramatic,  it may also be practical, allowing the necessary time for changes of scene, if  some element of overall continuity is needed.


Entrée:

The French word entrée has two  possible meanings in opera. It may refer to the entrance, or first appearance,  of a character (= German: Eintritt), or, more particularly, in the  French ballet de cour (court ballet), to one unified scene.


Étude:

An étude is a study, intended originally for the technical practice of the player. Chopin, Liszt and later composers elevated the étude into a significant piece of music, as opposed to a mere vehicle for exercise.


Exposition:

The exposition in sonata form is the first section of the movement, in which the principal thematic material is announced. In the exposition of a fugue (a fugal exposition) the voices (= parts) enter one by one with the same subject; the exposition ends when all the voices have entered.


Fagott:

Fagott (German) or fagotto (Italian) is the bassoon, the bass of the woodwind section in the orchestra (see ‘Bassoon’).


Fairy-tale opera:

(see ‘Märchenoper’)


Falsetto:

The falsetto voice is the treble register,  used for special effect by a male adult singer. Falsettists, singers who  normally use this register, if not elevated to the rank of countertenors, may  be found singing the alto line in English cathedral choirs. In opera the register  is generally used for comic effect, as of a man imitating a woman, for example  in Verdi’s Falstaff, where Falstaff imitates the words of Mistress Ford,  or to marked dramatic effect in innovative works of the later 20th century.  There is a general view that a tenor who uses falsetto to reach his top notes  is cheating.


Fanfare:

A fanfare is a flourish of trumpets or other similar instruments, used for military or ceremonial purposes, or music that conveys this impression.


Fantasy:

Fantasy (= French: fantaisie; Italian: fantasia; German: Fantasie) is a relatively free form from the 16th and 17th centuries, in which a composer may exercise his musical fancy (usually in contrapuntal form). In later periods the word was used to describe a much freer form, as in the written improvisations for piano of this title by Mozart, or Beethoven’s so-called ‘Moonlight’ Sonata, described by the composer as Sonata quasi una fantasia (‘Sonata like a fantasia’). 


Farsa:

The Italian farsa (farce) was a  shorter form of comic opera, popular in Venice in Rossini’s heyday. He himself  used the descriptive title for La cambiale di matrimonio (‘The Bill of  Marriage’), La scala di seta (‘The Silken Ladder’) and Il Signor  Bruschino.


Favola in musica:

The Italian favola in musica (story in  music) is descriptive of early Baroque opera at the beginning of the 17th  century. The term, borrowed from earlier literary examples, where the word favola was in common use in narrative titles for works of a mythological or  pastoral content, is used by Monteverdi on the title-page of his opera Orfeo,  where the dramatic content is of a similar kind.


Festa teatrale:

The descriptive title festa teatrale (theatrical  festivity) was applied, from about 1650 to 1750, to dramatic and musical works,  including, on occasions, operas and serenatas. They are often  celebratory in content.


Fiddle:

A fiddle is a violin, but the word is used either colloquially or to indicate a folk instrument. The Australian composer Percy Grainger, who objected to the use of words of Latin origin, used the word fiddle for violin, middle fiddle for viola and bass fiddle for cello, as part of his eccentric vocabulary of ‘blue-eyed English’.


Finale:

The finale is the last part of an act or  scene in opera, and is often extensive in length, combining a number of  distinct sections or movements, usually with an ensemble before the end. This  type of finale is exemplified in the operas Mozart wrote with the librettist  Lorenzo Da Ponte. There clearly continued a need for a general conclusion in  which the confusions and conflicts of all characters might in the end be  resolved. The ending itself, the ultimo finale, however, might be  relatively perfunctory, with a concluding chorus expressing happiness or  sorrow, or drawing a moral from what has passed.


Flat:

A flat is indicated by a sign derived from the letter b, showing that a note should be lowered by a semitone. In a more general sense music that is flat may simply be out of tune, its pitch below the accepted pitch.


Flautist:

A flautist is a player of the flute.


Flute:

The word flute may indicate a  variety of wind instruments without reeds. The modern orchestra makes use of  transverse flutes, augmented as necessary by a smaller transverse flute known  as a piccolo and very occasionally by a larger  instrument, the alto or bass flute, pitched a fourth lower. The straight flute  is known in English as a recorder (= French: flûte à bec; German: Blockflöte; Italian: flauto dolce)  but was not used in the orchestra after the later Baroque period.


Folia (follia), La:

La Folia (= Spanish: Folía; French: Folie d’Espagne) is a well-known dance tune popular from the 16th century or earlier and found in the work of composers such as Corelli (1653–1713), who used the theme for a set of variations forming a violin sonata, or later by Rachmaninov (1873–1943) in his incorrectly named Variations on a Theme of Corelli.


Forte:

Forte (Italian: loud) is used in directions to performers. It appears in the superlative form fortissimo (very loud). The letter f is an abbreviation of forte, ff an abbreviation of fortissimo, with fff or more rarely ffff even louder.


Fortepiano:

The word fortepiano (loud–soft) has effectively the same meaning as pianoforte (soft–loud), the full name of the piano, so called because of its hammer action and consequent ability to produce sounds both loud and soft, corresponding to the force applied to the keys. Fortepiano is generally used to indicate the earlier form of the piano, as it developed in the 18th century. A Mozart piano, for example, might be called a fortepiano. The instrument is smaller, more delicately incisive in tone than the modern instrument, and is in some respects more versatile.


Fugue:

Fugue has been described as a texture rather than a form. It is, in essence, a contrapuntal composition. The normal fugue opens with a subject or theme in one voice or part. A second voice answers, with  the same subject transposed and sometimes slightly altered, usually at the interval of a fifth; the first voice continues at the same time, with an accompaniment that may have the character of a countersubject that will be used again as the piece progresses. Other voices enter one by one, each of them with the subject, the third in the form of the first entry, the fourth in the form of the answer in the second voice. A fugue may have as few as two voices (the word voice does not necessarily imply singing in this context) and seldom more than four. The subject announced at the beginning provides the chief melodic element in a fugue. When all the voices have entered, completing the so-called fugal exposition, there will be an ‘episode’: a bridge that leads to a further entry or series of entries answering each other, now in different keys. The fugue, as it had developed by the time of Johann Sebastian Bach, continues in this way, often making use of stretto (overlapping entries of the subject) and a pedal-point (a sustained note, usually below the other parts) as it nears the end. The fugue became an important form or texture in the Baroque period, reaching its height in the work of J.S. Bach in the first half of the 18th century. Later composers continued to write fugues (it was a form favoured by Mozart’s wife Constanze), Beethoven including elaborate fugues in some of his later piano sonatas and a remarkable and challenging Grosse Fuge (‘Great Fugue’) as part of one of his later string quartets. The writing of fugue remains an important element in the technical training of composers.



Galliard:

The galliard is a courtly dance of the late 16th and early 17th century in triple metre usually following a slower duple-metre pavan. The two dances are often found in instrumental compositions of the period, sometimes in suites.


Galop:

The galop is a quick dance in duple metre, one of the most popular ballroom dances of the 19th century. The dance appears as a parody in Offenbach’s operetta Orpheus in the Underworld in a can-can.


Gamba:

Gamba (Italian: leg) is in English used colloquially to designate the viola da gamba or leg-viol. This bowed string instrument was popular from the 16th until the middle of the 18th century and held downwards, in a way similar to that of the modern cello (as opposed to the viola da braccio or arm-viol, the instrument of the violin family held on the arm or shoulder).


German dance:

The German dance (= German: Deutsche, Deutscher Tanz) describes generally the triple-metre dances of the late 18th and early 19th century: the Ländler and the Walzer (waltz). There are examples of this dance in the work of Beethoven and Schubert. 


Gigue:

The gigue (= Italian: giga; English: jig) is a rapid dance normally in compound duple metre (the main beats divided into three rather than two). The gigue became the accepted final dance in the Baroque instrumental suite.


Giocoso:

Giocoso (Italian: jocular, cheerful) is sometimes found as part of a tempo instruction to a performer, as in allegro giocoso (‘fast and cheerful’). The same Italian adjective is used in the descriptive title of Mozart’s opera Don Giovanni, a dramma giocoso.


Giusto:

Giusto (Italian: just, exact) is found in tempo indications: for example, allegro giusto (as in the last movement of Schubert’s ‘Trout’ Quintet) or tempo giusto (sometimes, as in Liszt, indicating a return to the original speed of the music after a freer passage).


Glissando:

Derived from the French glisser, to slide, the Italianised word is used to describe sliding in music from one note to another. On the harp or the piano this is achieved by sliding the finger or fingers over the strings or keys; it can be achieved similarly on bowed string instruments and by other means on the trombone, clarinet, French horn and pedal timpani, among others.


Glockenspiel:

The glockenspiel is a percussion instrument similar in form to the xylophone, but with metal rather than wooden bars for the notes. The instrument appeared only gradually in the concert hall and opera house and is found in Handel’s oratorio Saul and elsewhere. Mozart made famous use of the glockenspiel in Die Zauberflöte (‘The Magic Flute’), where it is a magic instrument for the comic bird-catcher Papageno. It is now a recognised if sparingly used instrument in the percussion section of the modern orchestra.


Gong:

The gong is a percussion instrument originating in the East. In the modern orchestra it is usually found in the form of the large Chinese tam-tam. The gong appears in Western orchestral music in the late 18th century; sets of gongs of varying size add exotic colour to Puccini’s oriental operas Madama Butterfly and Turandot.


Grand opéra:

French grand opéra developed in the  19th century, notably with Meyerbeer, although it had historical precedent as  early as Lully in the late 17th century, with the then demand for elaborate  spectacle. The usual form of grand opéra is as a five-act work, making  use of grandiose effects on a large scale. The genre was of considerable social  and cultural importance in Paris, with a consequent effect on techniques of  staging, which were often innovative and had to be impressive. It had influence  outside France on composers such as Wagner and Verdi, specifically in the  former’s Tannhäuser in the version arranged for Paris and the latter’s  spectacular Aida. Examples of the genre from Meyerbeer include Les  Huguenots (‘The Huguenots’) and L’Africaine (‘The African Maid’).


Grave:

Grave (Italian: slow, solemn) is used as an indication of tempo and mood, meaning slow and serious.


Grazioso:

Grazia (Italian: grace) forms the Italian adjective grazioso, used as an indication of expression and of tempo, particularly in the 18th century.


Gregorian chant:

(see ‘Plainchant’)


Guitar:

The modern concert guitar is a plucked string instrument generally with six strings. It has a long history, in one form or another. In more recent times it became popular in Vienna in the early 19th century with the work of the Italian composer and guitarist Mauro Giuliani and in Paris with the Catalan Fernando Sor. In Spain it is, of course, the national instrument. The player Andrés Segovia had a strong influence on the form of the modern guitar, the repertoire of which now includes fine concertos by the composers Joaquín Rodrigo, Manuel Ponce, Villa-Lobos, Castelnuovo-Tedesco and others.


Habanera (= Havanaise):

The habanera is a Cuban dance from Havana, later introduced to Spain. One of the most famous examples is found in Bizet’s Spanish opera Carmen, where Carmen herself sings a seductive habanera. Ravel includes one in his Rapsodie espagnole and also wrote a Vocalise en forme de habanera, while Debussy also makes use of the dance’s characteristic rhythm.


Harmonica:

The Western harmonica or mouth-organ is an invention of the early 19th century, inspired by the ancient Chinese bamboo mouth-organ, the sheng. The 20th-century chromatic harmonica, of which Larry Adler has been a leading exponent, has inspired a number of composers, including Vaughan Williams, who wrote a Romance for harmonica and orchestra.


Harmoniemusik:

Harmoniemusik is music for wind band. In its more limited sense the term is used to signify music for wind bands or wind ensembles in the service of the nobility from the middle of the 18th century to the end of the third decade of the 19th century, and their popular counterparts. The Harmonie, the band itself (which varied in number from a duo to the frequently found sextet or octet or to an even larger number of players) had its counterpart in France and in England, as well as its successors among emigrants to the United States of America.


Harmonium:

The harmonium, developed in the early 19th century from experiments in the last quarter of the century before, is a keyboard instrument that produces its sounds by means of air from bellows passing through free reeds—metal tongues that are made to vibrate. The instrument has a relatively small classical repertoire, its use either domestic or as a cheap substitute for the church organ. Dvořák wrote bagatelles for two violins, cello and harmonium, and Schoenberg made some use of the harmonium in chamber arrangements of works of his own and in versions of two waltzes by Johann Strauss.


Harmony:

Harmony describes the simultaneous sounding of two or more notes and the technique governing the construction of such chords and their arrangement in a succession. Following the convention of writing music from left to right on a horizontal set of lines (stave or staff), harmony may be regarded as vertical, as opposed to counterpoint, which is horizontal. In other words harmony deals with chords (simultaneous sounds) and counterpoint with melody set against melody.


Harp:

The harp is an instrument of great antiquity, represented from as early as 3000 BC in Sumeria. The form of the instrument has varied, but the modern double-action harp, a development of the early 19th century, is in general orchestral use. The strings are tuned in flats, starting from a bottom C flat, with seven pedals, each of which can change a given set of strings to a natural or a sharp. The C pedal, therefore, in its three positions, can make all the Cs on the instrument flat, natural or sharp. Other forms of harp survive. The Aeolian harp, with strings of the same length and pitch but of different thicknesses, was to be placed by an open window, its sounds produced by the wind blowing through the strings. Various forms of Celtic harp are still in use.


Harpsichord:

The harpsichord (or cembalo) is a keyboard instrument with strings running from front to back of its wing-shaped horizontal box and soundboard. Unlike the piano and the earlier clavichord, which have hammers that strike the strings, the harpsichord has a mechanism by which the strings are plucked. The instrument seems to have existed in a simple form in the 14th century and assumed considerable importance from the early 16th until the fuller development of the pianoforte towards the end of the 18th century. Variations of dynamics on the harpsichord are possible through a) the use of stops that activate different lengths of string, b) the use of a muting buff stop, and c) the two manuals often found on the instrument. In addition to its ubiquitous use in the music of the Baroque period, the harpsichord has also been used by modern composers, since its revival at the end of the 19th century.


Haute-contre:

The haute-contre voice is the highest  male voice in French opera. In range it is equivalent to the alto and was  normally written in the alto clef, corresponding to the highest of the three  middle parts of the Lully five-part string orchestra, taken by a smaller form  of viola. There is argument as to whether the haute-contre is a high  tenor, with some use of falsetto, or a falsettist, but it would seem probable  that, following the definition given by Berlioz, the voice is that of a very  high tenor. A number of leading male roles in French Baroque opera were  allotted to the haute-contre.


Heldentenor:

The German Heldentenor (heroic tenor)  is a tenor of considerable power and stamina, necessary for a number of leading  Wagnerian roles.


Horn:

The horn takes its name from the horn of an animal, the original form of this wind instrument in ancient times. The instrument was long associated with hunting and as a means of military signalling. The instrument now generally known as the French horn developed in France in its familiar helical form, but by the early 18th century the horn, in one form or another, had come to be a frequent instrument in music for the church, the theatre and the chamber. The natural horn was able to play the notes of the harmonic series, modified by the use of the right hand in the bell of the instrument, and in different keys by the use of different crooks that changed the length of the tube and hence the length of the air column. The valve horn was developed in the first quarter of the 19th century, its two and later three valves making variations possible in the length of tube and hence in the pitch of the fundamental and harmonic series stemming from it; but the natural horn continued in use at the same time. The double horn was developed in the late 19th century and is now in common use. Concertos for the French horn include the four concertos by Mozart. In the Classical orchestra the two horns played a largely sustaining part. The modern orchestra normally has four French horns. The hunting associations of the horn led to its evocative use in Romantic music, as in Weber’s opera Der Freischütz and in the same composer’s opera Oberon, in which the horn has a magic role to play.


Hornpipe:

The hornpipe is a rapid British dance that exists in various metres—triple, duple and quadruple. In its earlier English form it is found in the keyboard suites and stage music of the English composer Henry Purcell, and in keyboard and orchestral movements by Handel. It later came to be popularly associated particularly with sailors in the so-called ‘Sailors’ Hornpipe’ derived from a fiddle tune.


Humoresque (= Humoreske):

Schumann was the first composer to use the title Humoreske for a relatively long work for piano, the humour of the title used rather in the sense of a ‘mood’, of one sort or another. The word later came to indicate much shorter pieces, such as the well-known G flat Humoresque by Dvořák, one of a set of eight.


Hymn:

A hymn is a song of praise, whether to a god, saint or hero. The plainchant hymn has a place in the Divine Office. In Protestant Christian worship, where the hymn assumed considerable importance, after the chorales of Martin Luther and his followers, the metrical homophonic form dominated.


Impromptu:

The word impromptu was first used as a title for a musical composition in 1822 by the Bohemian composer Vorišek, who applied it to six piano pieces; this was imitated by Schubert’s publisher in naming a set of four piano pieces (which were then followed by four more, perhaps so named by the composer). Chopin used the title for four compositions in this seemingly improvised form, and there are further impromptus by other composers from that period onwards, generally, but not always, for a single instrument.


Improvisation:

Improvisation was once a normal part of a performer’s stock-in-trade. Many of the greatest composer—performers, from Bach to Mozart and Beethoven, were masters of improvisation, but in the 19th century this became a less common part of public performance. (It remained and remains, however, a necessary skill for a church organist, traditionally required to provide a musical accompaniment of varying length to liturgical ritual). In Baroque music the realisation of a figured bass, the improvisation of a keyboard part from a given series of chords, was a necessary musical accomplishment, while the improvisatory element in the addition of ornaments to a melodic part remained normal in opera and other kinds of solo performance.


Instrumentation:

Instrumentation is generally used to mean orchestration, the art of writing music for instruments, or, alternatively, the actual scoring of a particular composition.


Interlude:

An interlude in stage works (= French: entr’acte;  German: Zwischenspiel) is an orchestral passage or more elaborate  entertainment between acts or scenes, sometimes for dramatic purposes and  sometimes designed to allow time for scene changes in a work that is continuous.  The word has a wider application, designating either separate instrumental  compositions or passages inserted in orchestral works or other compositions  between distinct sections.


Intermède:

An intermède is a work, often  including singing and dancing, that was intended to be performed between the  acts of a play or in a bill with an opera. Originating with the French court  masque of the early Baroque period, the term continued in use, later as a  translation of the Italian intermezzo, and hence as a description of works such  as Pergolesi’s La serva padrona (‘The Servant as Mistress’), when it had  its first influential performances in Paris in 1754.


Intermedio:

The Italian intermedio is a dramatic  and musical work to be performed between the acts of plays. It developed in the  16th century as one of the forerunners of opera and often served a celebratory  purpose, continuing into the 17th century as a court entertainment.


Intermezzo:

The Italian intermezzo replaced the intermedio in 18th-century opera as an entertainment between the acts of an opera or  play, relevant or irrelevant in plot to the work that framed it. It was often  in the form of a short comic opera, providing, therefore, comic relief from the  weightier matters of opera seria, and drawing, often enough, on the  traditions and forms of the commedia dell’arte, with its stock  characters.


Interval:

In music an interval is the distance in pitch between two notes, counted from the lower note upwards, with the lower note as the first of the interval. The violin, for example, is tuned in intervals of a fifth (G to D, D to A and A to E), the double bass in fourths (E to A, A to D and D to G). Harmonic intervals occur simultaneously, as when a violinist tunes the instrument, listening carefully to the sound of two adjacent strings played together. Melodic intervals occur between two notes played one after the other.


Intonation:

Intonation is the exactness of pitch or lack of it in playing or singing. Collective intonation is that of a group of instruments, where slight individual variations in pitch can be lost in a generally more favourable effect.


Invention:

The two-part ‘inventions’ of Johann Sebastian Bach are contrapuntal two-voice keyboard compositions, and the word is often understood in this sense, although it had a less precise meaning in earlier music.


Istesso tempo, l’:

L’istesso tempo, the same speed, is found as an instruction to the player to return to the previous speed of the music.


Jota:

The jota is a traditional Spanish dance, transmuted into an orchestral composition by the Russian composer Glinka in his Jota aragonesa.


Kapellmeister:

The Kapellmeister is the director of music (= Italian: maestro di cappella; French: maître de chapelle) within a musical establishment, either of a king or prince, or of an opera-house or municipality. The term Kapellmeistermusik has a pejorative implication, suggesting music that is correct but uninspired, a criticism widely if inaccurately applied to a number of 19th-century composers now subject to re-evaluation.


Key:

Keys on a musical instrument are the levers which when depressed produce a particular pitch of note. The word may be applied to keyboard instruments such as the piano, the organ and the harpsichord, or to the metal keys on woodwind instruments such as the flute, oboe, clarinet and bassoon.
The key in which a piece of music is written indicates the scale used and the key-note or home-note, on the chord of which it must end. Not all music is in a key, since attempts have been made in the 20th century to extend music beyond the supposed limitations of key or tonality. It is, in any case, only the very simplest music that remains in one key throughout. Contrast is usually sought by changes of key during a composition, which will end in the key in which it began, although mode may change from major to minor (that is, a symphony in C minor may end with a movement in C major, after intervening movements in other keys). The Fifth Symphony of Beethoven, for example, is in C minor and opens with a movement in that key, followed by a slow movement in A flat major, a C minor third movement with a Trio section in C major, and a last movement in C major.



Key signature:

The key signature is the presence of sharps or flats, or absence of either, at the beginning of a piece of music, indicating the sharps, flats and naturals belonging to the key of the music. Since a major or minor scale, the two now in common use, has a fixed order of tones and semitones (whole steps and half steps), these can only be preserved when there is a change of key-note by the addition of sharps or flats. In the major scale, for example, there are semitones or half steps between the third and fourth degrees and seventh and eighth degrees of the scale. In the scale of C major, played on the white notes of the piano, these semitones fall between E and F and between B and C, a fact apparent from the piano keyboard, where there is no black key between the notes that form these pairs. To keep the same pattern in the scale of G, the note F must be raised to F sharp, so that there is still a semitone between the seventh and eighth notes of the scale. In major keys, each key with an extra sharp starts on a key-note a fifth higher, while the keys with flats are in a descending order of fifths; i.e. C major itself has no sharps, G has one sharp, D two, A three, E four, B five, F sharp six and C sharp major seven, each new sharp the seventh note of the scale. Descending in fifths, C major has no flats, F has one flat, B flat two flats, E flat three, A flat four, D flat five, G flat six and C flat seven, each new flat the fourth note of the scale.


Konzertmeister:

The leader of an orchestra (that is, the principal first violin) is known in German as a Konzertmeister and in the United States as a concertmaster, the latter term now finding more general favour in other English-speaking countries, apart from Great Britain, where the word leader is still largely preferred.


Lamentations:

The Lamentations of Jeremiah form part of the Catholic liturgy of Holy Week, the week before Easter, traditionally chanted but from the middle of the 15th century providing material for polyphonic setting.


Ländler:

The Ländler is an Austrian country dance in a slow triple metre, a precursor of the waltz.


Larghetto:

Larghetto is a diminutive form of Largo (Italian: broad, wide, large) usually a direction of tempo, meaning slow.  Larghetto is slowish, not as slow as Largo.


Largo:

Largo (Italian: broad, wide, large and consequently slow) is frequently used as an instruction to performers. Larghetto is a diminutive form, meaning slowish but not as slow as Largo. Handel’s Largo, an aria from his opera Serse, is in fact marked larghetto, although this does not seem to affect its speed in popular performance.


Legato:

Legato (Italian: smooth) is used as an instruction to performers. It is the opposite of staccato, which indicates a shortening and consequent detaching of notes.


Leggero (Leggiero):

Leggero (Italian: light; = French: léger) and is used as a direction to performers.


Legno:

Legno (Italian: wood), appears in the phrase col legno (‘with the wood’) an instruction to string players to hit the strings with the back of the bow. Examples of col legno are found in the Danse macabre of Saint-Säens and at the opening of Holst’s The Planets.


Leitmotif:

The leitmotif (= German: Leitmotiv) or leading motif is distinguished by  analysts of the operas and music dramas of Richard Wagner, in which a motif,  here a theme or fragment of a theme, of whatever length or form, is used to  represent a person, action or idea. It has obvious connection with the earlier  practice of the reminiscence motif, where a theme or fragment of a theme is  used to remind the listener of its earlier  dramatic associations. Wagner’s leading motifs are of much greater complexity,  but contribute notably to the musical unity of a work.


Lento:

Lento (Italian: slow; = French: lent, lentement) is used in instructions to performers. Negatively some French composers, notably Couperin, use the direction sans lenteur (‘without slowness’).


Libretto:

The libretto of an opera is the text, an  element that even up to the 19th century all too often seemed of greater  importance than the music, which was disposable. Clearly the contribution of  the writer is of fundamental importance in an opera, a fact that modern  audiences sometimes forget. The librettist has generally been restricted to  some extent by musical requirements, matters of length and of possible verse  forms and choice of language, and has often worked closely with the composer to  produce a unified work of art. Famous librettists range, historically, from  Rinuccini and Striggio in the early Baroque period to Busenello, Zeno and  Metastasio, Quinault, Calzabigi and Lorenzo Da Ponte, Scribe, Pavia and Boito,  Richard Wagner and, to continue a list that becomes increasingly invidious in  its omissions, W.H. Auden and Chester Kallman with their libretti for  Stravinsky and for Henze. The history of the libretto is admirably discussed in  Patrick Smith’s book, The Tenth Muse.


Lied:

Lied (German: song), Lieder in the plural, is used more specifically to indicate songs in the great German tradition of song-writing exemplified by the work of Schubert, Schumann, Brahms, Hugo Wolf, Richard Strauss and others. It should not be confused with Leid, meaning sorrow, as in Kreisler’s Liebesleid (‘The Sorrow of Love’).


Lieto fine:

The lieto fine (happy ending) soon  became a standard requirement of opera in the 17th and 18th centuries.  Rinuccini’s tragic ending to his original libretto for Orfeo, with  Orpheus torn apart by savage bacchantes, was replaced, in Monteverdi’s  subsequently published score, by the happy elevation of Orpheus to the heavens,  and 36 years later Nero and his mistress Poppaea end the same composer’s L’incoronazione  di Poppea (‘The Coronation of Poppaea’) in loving happiness, although  audiences would have been aware of the latent irony in this, in view of the later  fate of both of them. While Ariadne, abandoned by Theseus on the island of  Naxos, may find happiness with Bacchus and his train, Dido provides an  exception to the convention of a happy ending, at least in Metastasio’s  treatment of the story, set by more than 60 composers during the course of a  century.


L’istesso tempo:

L’istesso tempo, the same speed, is found as an instruction to the player to return to the previous speed of the music.


Loure:

The loure is a French dance of the 17th and 18th centuries, the name derived from a bagpipe used in Normandy. The dance is usually in 6/4 time and has been described as a slow gigue. Examples are found in Bach’s E major Partita for unaccompanied violin and in the fifth of his French Suites.


Lute:

The lute, a plucked string instrument popular from the Middle Ages until the 18th century and now revived, came originally from the East, its name derived from the Arabic ud. It existed in many different forms and in its Western form is usually pear-shaped, with a flat belly and central soundhole or rose. Its neck has frets, pieces of gut tied to mark the notes on the fingerboard, and its peg-box is generally bent back to form a right angle with the neck. The number of strings has varied, although the six-string lute was common. The lute was one of the most popular instruments in the time of Shakespeare, when the leading performer was John Dowland, who wrote songs with lute accompaniment. In the first half of the 18th century Johann Sebastian Bach wrote for the instrument, of which one of the leading exponents and composers was Sylvius Leopold Weiss. A player of the lute is a lutenist, or, less commonly, lutanist. The meaning of luthier, originally a maker of lutes, has been extended to cover makers of all string instruments.


Lyre:

The lyre, the symbol of a musician in Western cultural tradition, is an ancient instrument, found in characteristic form in ancient Greece, where it was the instrument of Apollo. Similar instruments, with strings stretched from a cross-bar to a lower sound-box, to be held in the left arm and plucked with the right hand, are found in other cultures.


Lyric soprano:

The lyric soprano voice is that usually  required for the generality of operatic heroines. Typical roles of this kind  include that of Mimì in Puccini’s La bohème. There are occasions when  the dramatic nature of a role may require a combination of the lyric and the  dramatic.


Lyric tenor:

With the increasing prominence of the tenor  voice in later 18th-century opera, leading to its predominance in heroic or  amatory roles, there was a need for the qualities of a lyric tenor voice,  essential in a lover, such as Don Ottavio in Mozart’s Don Giovanni or  Rodolfo in Puccini’s La bohème. As with the lyric soprano, there are  times when a stronger dramatic element is also needed.


Madrigal:

Originally a form of vocal composition of 14th-century Italy, the madrigal became, in the 16th and 17th centuries, a favourite form of part-song, stemming first from Italy. In England the madrigal became popular in the last two decades of the 16th century in adaptations of Italian compositions and in new works by English composers.


Madrigal comedy:

The Italian madrigal comedy has some  importance as a precursor of opera in the later 16th century. It was derived,  as its name suggests, from the contemporary fashion for madrigals, part-songs  often on a pastoral subject, and from the commedia dell’arte.  Characteristic examples are found in Orazio Vecchi’s L’Amfiparnasso (‘The  Twin Peaks of Parnassus’) and Il convito musicale (‘The Musical Banquet’).


Maestoso:

Maestoso (Italian: majestic) is used to suggest a majestic manner of performance, either in mood or speed.


Magic opera:

(see ‘Zauberoper’)


Magnificat:

The Magnificat is the canticle drawn from the biblical words attributed to the Mother of Christ, ‘My soul doth magnify the Lord’. It forms part of the evening service of Vespers, in the Divine Office of the Catholic liturgy, and thus appears in composed settings. As part of the evening service of the Church of England it has similarly been subjected to musical treatment. There are notable settings in the early 17th century by Monteverdi and a hundred years later by Johann Sebastian Bach and Vivaldi, among many others.


Major:

Major (Latin: greater) is used in musical terminology to describe a form of scale that corresponds to the Ionian mode, the scale on the white notes of the keyboard from C to C. The intervals between the first note or tonic (key-note) and the second, third, sixth and seventh degrees of the major scale are described as major (that is, C to D, a major second; C to E, a major third; C to A, a major sixth; C to B, a major seventh). A major chord or major triad consists of a bottom note with a note a major third above, and, optionally, a note a perfect fifth above the bottom note. In this way the chord or triad C – E – G is described as major.


Malagueña:

A malagueña is a Spanish dance from the region of Málaga. The word is later used to indicate a form of Spanish gypsy song. There is an example of the mood and rhythm of the malagueña in Ravel’s Rapsodie espagnole.


Mandolin:

The mandolin, a plucked string instrument similar to the lute, exists in various forms. It has fixed metal frets and metal strings in pairs. The prevalent method of playing is tremolando, the notes rapidly repeated with a plectrum. It has been used in opera, notably in Verdi’s Otello and in Falstaff, and in the concert hall in Mahler’s Symphonies Nos 7 and 8.


Manual:

The manual is a keyboard for the hands, the word used for instruments such as the organ or harpsichord that often have more than one keyboard. It is opposed to the pedal-board found generally on the organ and much more rarely on the harpsichord or fortepiano.


Märchenoper:

Märchenoper (fairy-tale  opera) has a particular place in German opera towards the end of the 19th and  into the 20th century. It exemplifies and stems from a German national interest  in traditional stories, notably those collected and published earlier in the  19th century by the Brothers Grimm. Among the best-known examples of the genre  is Humperdinck’s Hänsel und Gretel (‘Hansel and Gretel’), and there are a  number of further examples from his pupil Siegfried Wagner, son of Richard  Wagner, who explores the same vein in Der Bärenhäuter (‘The Man in the  Bear’s Skin’), Schwarzschwanenreich (‘Kingdom of the Black Swan’) and other  works.


Marimba:

The marimba is a form of resonating xylophone occasionally used in the Western orchestra in compositions of the 20th century.


Masque:

The masque was a court entertainment in  England principally in the late 16th and early 17th centuries. It involved  drama, dance and music, with an important element of spectacle. Later in the  17th century masques were included in theatrical entertainment, as in the  Chinese masque appended to Purcell’s The Fairy Queen. It has been suggested  that the same composer’s short opera Dido and Aeneas, like John Blow’s Venus  and Adonis, was first presented as a masque at the court of Charles II. As  with French court ballet, the dancers, and in England singers and actors, in  court masques were often amateurs, courtiers or members of the royal family.


Mass:

The Mass, the Eucharist of Catholic worship (= Latin: Missa; Italian: Messa; French and German: Messe), has long provided texts for musical setting. The Ordinary of the Mass, the normally recurrent parts of the liturgy, consists of the Kyrie eleison (‘Lord have mercy’), Gloria (‘Glory be to God in the highest’), Credo (‘I believe’), Sanctus (‘Holy, holy, holy’), Benedictus (‘Blessed be he who comes in the name of the Lord’) and the Agnus Dei (‘Lamb of God’). These are the texts most often set. The Proper of the Mass changes from day to day, according to the season or the occasion. The texts of the Proper are less often set, except for texts that may be used with some frequency.


Mazurka:

The mazurka is a Polish dance, transformed by Chopin in some 50 piano pieces with this name.


Measure:

A measure is, in English, a bar, in the sense of the music written between the vertical bar-lines drawn on the stave to mark the metrical units of a piece of music (see also ‘bar’).


Mélodies:

The French art-songs of the 19th and 20th centuries are known as mélodies, the counterpart of the German Lieder.


Melodrama:

Melodrama makes use of spoken words,  accompanied by or framed by music. The form was developed, in particular, by Jiří  Antonín (Georg) Benda in Gotha, following the example in France of Jean-Jacques  Rousseau. Benda’s very successful melodramas included Medea, Ariadne  auf Naxos (‘Ariadne on Naxos’) and Pygmalion, the first two of which  suggested to Mozart that he too should attempt the form, although this plan  came to nothing. It is possible to distinguish a monodrama, which employs one  performer, from a duodrama, which calls for two. Melodrama took a place within  opera itself, when spoken dialogue was accompanied by music. A notable example  of this can be seen in Weber’s Der Freischütz (‘The Marksman’), when magic  bullets are cast, by diabolical means, in the midnight depths of the forest,  and there is a sinister dungeon example in Beethoven’s only opera, Fidelio.  It has since found an important dramatic place in contemporary opera and music  theatre.


Melodramma:

The Italian word melodramma is  sometimes used in the 19th century as a synonym for opera, but usually with  reference to the libretto rather than the music.


Meno:

Meno (Italian: less) is used in musical directions to qualify other words, as in meno mosso (‘with less movement’).


Mesto:

Mesto (Italian: sad) is used in directions to performers as an indication of mood, as in the slow movement of the Horn Trio of Brahms, which is marked Adagio mesto.


Metamorphosis:

Metamorphosis, change of shape, is used  particularly in the sense of thematic metamorphosis: the transformation of  thematic elements used by composers such as Liszt (a procedure unkindly  satirised by one contemporary critic as the life and adventures of a theme). 


Metre:

(See ‘time’)


Metronome:

The metronome is a device formerly based on the principle of the pendulum, but now controlled more often by electronic means, which measures the equal beats of a piece of music; it is used by players as a guide. The metronome mark of 60 indicates one beat a second, 120 is twice as fast and 240 twice as fast again. The principle was based on the work of Galileo, but the most frequently found clockwork metronome was devised in Vienna by Beethoven’s contemporary and, briefly, collaborator Count Maelzel.


Mezzo:

Mezzo (Italian: half) is found particularly in the compound words mezzo-forte (‘half loud’, represented by the letters mf), and mezzo-piano (‘half soft’, represented by the letters mp). Mezzo can also serve as a colloquial abbreviation for mezzo-soprano, the female voice that employs a generally lower register than a soprano and consequently is often, in opera, given the parts of confidante, nurse or mother—secondary roles to the heroine, who is usually a soprano. The instruction mezza voce directs a singer to sing with a controlled tone. The instruction can also occur in instrumental music.


Mezzo-soprano:

The mezzo-soprano voice is the female voice immediately below the soprano, calling for a more substantial lower range. The term is sometimes used as a synonym for contralto, but a distinction should be made between the two types of voice. The mezzo-soprano assumed operatic importance as a distinct category of voice in the 19th century, as the soprano was urged to new heights. Those unable to reach these with any degree of comfort could be honourably accommodated in the category of mezzo-soprano. The voice came to be more often used for secondary roles, for the seconda donna rather than the prima donna, but exceptions to this include Bizet’s Carmen and a number of Rossini heroines, including Rosina in Il barbiere di Siviglia (‘The Barber of Seville’), although this role is sometimes adapted to suit a coloratura soprano. There has often been some flexibility in casting, although a role such as that of the gypsy Azucena in Verdi’s Il Trovatore (‘The Troubadour’) or, at a more elevated social level, Princess Eboli in the same composer’s Don Carlos, are essentially for mezzo-soprano.


Minor:

Minor (Latin: smaller) is used in musical terminology to describe a form of scale that corresponds, in its natural form, to the Aeolian mode: the scale on the white notes of the keyboard from A to A. Two other forms of the minor scale are commonly used: the melodic minor and the harmonic minor. The melodic minor scale is a form of minor scale that uses the natural minor form descending, but sharpens the sixth and seventh degrees when ascending. The harmonic minor scale uses the natural minor with a sharpened seventh degree when ascending and descending. The intervals between the first note or tonic (key-note) and the third, sixth and seventh degrees of the natural minor scale are described as minor (that is, C to E flat , a minor third; C to A flat, a minor sixth; C to B flat, a minor seventh). C to D flat forms a minor second. A minor chord or minor triad consists of a bottom note with a note a minor third above, and, optionally, a note a perfect fifth above the bottom note. In this way the chord or triad C – E flat – G is described as minor.


Minstrel:

The word minstrel has been used loosely to indicate a musical entertainer, providing his own accompaniment to his singing. The medieval minstrel, a secular musician, flourished between the 13th and 15th century, generally as an itinerant singer.


Minuet:

A minuet (= French: menuet; German: Menuett; Italian: minuetto) is a triple-metre French dance popular from the second half of the 17th until at least the end of the 18th century. It appears as an occasional element of the Baroque instrumental suite and later as a movement in the pre-Classical and Classical symphony and allied forms, gradually replaced by the scherzo. The minuet usually has a complementary trio (a contrasting section in similar metre).


Miserere:

Miserere (Latin: have mercy) is the first word of Psalms 50 (51), 55 (56) and 56 (57), and the word appears on numerous occasions in Latin liturgical texts. There is a famous setting of Psalm 50 (= 51 in the Hebrew and English Psalter) by the early-17th-century Italian composer Gregorio Allegri, the property of the Papal Chapel, written down from memory by Mozart at the age of 14 during his visit to Rome in 1770.


Missa:

The Latin word Missa, the Catholic Mass or Eucharist, is found in the title of many polyphonic settings of the liturgical texts. The phrase Missa brevis (‘short Mass’) was at first used to indicate a Mass with shorter musical settings of the Ordinary. It later came to be used on occasion for settings that included only the first two parts of the Ordinary of the Mass: the Kyrie and the Gloria. Mass titles, particularly in the 16th century, are often distinguished by the musical material from which they are derived, sacred or secular, as in Missa Adieu mes amours, or Missa Ave Regina. The Missa Papae Marcelli (‘Mass of Pope Marcellus’) is a setting of the Mass written by Palestrina supposedly to preserve polyphony from condemnation by the Council of Trent.


Mode:

Modal scales are found in various forms. Plainchant, the traditional music of the Catholic liturgy, makes use of eight modes, the church modes, with names derived from very different, earlier Greek modes. The first church mode is the Dorian, the third the Phrygian, the fifth the Lydian and the seventh the Mixolydian. These are the so-called ‘authentic’ modes, their range from D to D, E to E, F to F and G to G respectively. Each authentic mode has an associated ‘plagal’ mode which uses the same final note but within an octave range that starts a fourth below the final and extends a fifth above it. These plagal modes take the Greek prefix hypo-, as in Hypodorian, Hypophrygian, Hypolydian and Hypomixolydian. Theorists later distinguished two further pairs of authentic and plagal modes, the Aeolian, A to A, and the Ionian, C to C. The Locrian mode, B to B, is inaccurately named, but was distinguished in the 16th century as Hyperaeolian. Early polyphony, reaching a height of perfection in the 16th century, is modal, and its techniques continue to be studied as modal counterpoint, a necessary element in the training of a musician. These listed modes and a variety of other modes may be distinguished in folk-music, while composers of the 20th century have constructed their own synthetic scales or modes.



Moderato:

Moderato (Italian: moderate) is used as an indication of the speed to be adopted by a performer. It may be used to qualify other adjectives: e.g. allegro moderato.


Mosso:

Mosso (Italian: moved, agitated) is generally found in the phrases più mosso (faster) and meno mosso, (slower).


Molto:

Molto (Italian: much, very) is often found in directions to performers, as in allegro molto (or allegro di molto), molto vivace or molto piano.


Monody:

In the development of opera, the  word monody, essentially music for a single voice, is associated with the  dramatic monody of the early Baroque, in which the vocal line, accompanied by basso  continuo of a chordal and a bass instrument, follows the contours and dramatic  stresses of the text. The word covers recitative, arioso and aria at a period  when the first and last were not formally distinguished.


Motet:

A motet is generally a choral composition for church use but using texts that are not necessarily a part of the liturgy. It is the Catholic equivalent of the anthem of the Church of England. Motets appear in very different forms from the 13th century onwards.


Motif:

The word motif, coined from French, is used in English instead of the German Motiv, or English and American motive. It may be defined as a recognisable thematic particle, a group of notes that has a recognisable thematic character; hence it is longer than a figure, the shortest recognisable element.


Moto:

Moto (Italian: motion, movement) is found in the direction con moto (‘with movement’—ie fast). A moto perpetuo is a rapid piece that gives the impression of perpetual motion, as in the Allegro de concert of Paganini or the last movement of Ravel’s Violin Sonata.


Movement:

A movement is a section of a more extended work that is more or less complete in itself. Occasionally movements are linked together, either through the choice of a final inconclusive chord or by a linking note, as in the first and second movement of Mendelssohn’s Violin Concerto.


Music drama:

Although the words music drama  might well have been and were used for a long period to signify opera, they are  now most aptly applied to the later musical and dramatic works of Richard  Wagner, the Gesamtkunstwerk in which he combined all the arts, in  particular works such as Der Ring des Nibelungen (‘The Ring of the  Nibelung’) and Parsifal.


Music theatre:

The descriptive term music theatre  found favour in the second half of the 20th century in a reaction against the  traditional opera house and all that it involved. It suggested an emphasis on  the theatrical element, as in Alexander Goehr’s Naboth’s Vineyard or the Eight Songs for a Mad King and other such works by Peter Maxwell Davies,  to be performed by actor-singers or, in some cases, dancers. The genre  attracted the attention of Stockhausen and Henze in Germany, Nono and Berio in  Italy, Ligeti and, in America, John Cage and his disciples.


Mute:

A mute (= Italian: sordino; French: sourdine; German: Dämpfer) is used to muffle the sound of an instrument. Mutes work by controlling the vibration of the bridge on a string instrument or muffling the sound by placing an object in the bell of a brass instrument.


Natural:

The adjective ‘natural’ indicates a note that is neither sharpened nor flattened; a sign called a natural is placed next to a note to indicate the cancelling of a previous sharp or flat. The adjective is also used to describe the horn or trumpet without valves.


Neoclassical:

Neoclassical style in music indicates a 20th-century eclectic return by some composers to various styles and forms of earlier periods, whether Classical or Baroque. The style is exemplified in the score for the ballet Pulcinella by Stravinsky or by the same composer’s opera The Rake’s Progress.


Nocturne:

A nocturne is a night-piece, music that evokes a nocturnal mood. It was developed as a form of solo piano music by the Irish pianist and composer John Field in the early 19th century, leading to its notable use by Chopin. The title has been used more recently by other composers for both instrumental and vocal compositions.


Nonet:

A nonet is a piece for nine performers or the name for a group of nine performers.


Notation:

Notation is the method of writing music down, practices of which have varied during the course of history. Staff notation is the conventional notation that makes use of the five-line staff or stave, while some recent composers have employed systems of graphic notation to indicate their more varied requirements, often needing detailed explanations in a preface to the score. Notation is inevitably imprecise, providing a guide of varying accuracy for performers who must additionally draw on stylistic tradition.


Note:

A note in English is either a single sound or its representation in notation. American English refers to a single sound as a tone, following German practice.


Number opera:

Number opera is opera that is  made up of distinct and separate sections, complete in themselves. This form is  not present in opera that is continuous and through-composed.


Oboe:

The oboe is a double-reed instrument and an important part of the woodwind section of the modern orchestra. The mechanism of its keys underwent considerable development in the 19th century. In earlier times it formed an important part of the outdoor military band, but the Western symphony orchestra normally uses a pair of instruments. The oboe d’amore is the alto of the oboe family, used in the Baroque period, and the tenor is found in the cor anglais or, in the mid-18th century, the oboe da caccia. The tone of the instrument, much affected by different methods of cutting the reeds, can impart a characteristic sound to a whole orchestra.


Octave:

The octave is an interval of an eighth, as for example from the note C to C or D to D. The first note can have a sharp or flat providing the last note has the corresponding sharp or flat (i.e. C sharp to C sharp).


Octet:

An octet is a composition for eight performers or the name for a group of eight performers.


Ondes martenot:

The ondes martenot, an electronic instrument invented by the French musician Maurice Martenot, produces single sounds by means of a keyboard that controls the frequencies from an oscillator. It has a wide range and offers the possibility of glissando. It became popular among French composers, including Milhaud, Honegger, Koechlin, Schmitt, Ibert, Jolivet, Messiaen and Boulez. Varèse also wrote for it, as he did for the less versatile electronic instrument, the theremin.


Opera:

An opera is a drama in which most of the actors sing all or most of their parts. The form developed at the end of the 16th century in Italy, from where it spread to other regions of Europe, although it never became a regular part of London musical life until the early 18th century. Internationally Italian opera has proved immensely important and popular, while opera in France underwent independent development in the later 17th century under the Italian-born composer Lully. The 19th century brought particular developments in German Romantic opera and in the innovative music-dramas of Wagner. The word opera covers a wide variety of musico-dramatic forms, from the Orfeo of Monteverdi to the Dreigroschenoper (‘The Threepenny Opera’) of Kurt Weill and Berthold Brecht of 1928, derived from the English anti-heroic Beggar’s Opera two centuries earlier.



Opéra bouffe:

Opéra bouffe is the term  used for French comic opera of the middle and later 19th century, witty in its  dialogue and light-hearted in its music. The genre is exemplified by works such  as Offenbach’s Orphée aux enfers (‘Orpheus in the Underworld’).


Opera buffa:

Although not at first  regarded as a classification of opera in the earlier 18th century, the term opera buffa (= French: opéra bouffon) came  into gradual formal use to signify Italian comic opera. The later 17th century  had brought a mixture of the serious with episodes of comic relief. The 18th  century introduced a reform that tended to the separation of the two elements,  the comic and the serious. The opera buffa was developed in Naples, thereafter  spreading north to Rome and to Venice, assisted by the activity of the  playwright and librettist Carlo Goldoni and culminating in the work of Mozart  and Lorenzo Da Ponte, Le nozze di Figaro (‘The Marriage of Figaro’), Don  Giovanni and Così fan tutte (‘All Women Do the Same’), between 1786  and 1790. Less important as the 19th century went on, there were still notable  examples of opera buffa in Rossini’s Il barbiere di Siviglia (‘The Barber of Seville’) and Donizetti’s L’elisir  d’amore (‘The Elixir of Love’) and Don Pasquale.


Opéra comique:

Having its origins in the music of the Foires (‘Fairs’) in Paris, opéra comique developed as a musical and  theatrical entertainment usually also involving spoken dialogue. This form and  distinction belongs essentially to the 19th century. The fair theatres offered  generally popular entertainment, but the form changed under the influence of  Italian opera buffa, after the rivalry of the 1750s between this Italian  form and French formal opera. There were inevitable changes with the Revolution,  when Viotti’s attempts to introduce naturalised Italian comic opera failed. In  the new century opéra comique, staged by the theatre company of that  name that had been first established in 1714 and continued, in one form or  another, until relatively recently, included works of relatively serious  content, such as the earlier version of Gounod’s Faust, with its element  of spoken dialogue. There was less of a place for spectacle or ballet, and  various conventions of casting became established.


Opéra féerie:

Opéra féerie (fairy  opera) is the French counterpart of the German Märchenoper (fairy-tale  opera). Massenet’s opera Cendrillon (‘Cinderella’) from the end of the  19th century provides an example of the genre, which had its roots, as far as  plot and characters are concerned, in the operas and opéra-ballet of the  18th century.


Opéra semiseria:

The Italian opera semiseria of the  earlier 19th century includes serious and lighter elements, as in Bellini’s La  sonnambula (‘The Sleepwalker’).


Opera seria:

A retrospective classification of Italian  opera on a serious subject, opera seria itself had its origin in a  reaction against the mixture of the comic and the serious that had prevailed in  the later 17th century, defying the rules of Aristotle and provoking criticism  from proponents of French classical theatre. The chief librettists in this  reform were Apostolo Zeno and the writer known as Metastasio. With them the  form took a precise shape, depending on a number of distinct arias, properly  allocated, with the necessary variety of feeling (affetto) and of versification.  The form, reflected by the work of Handel in London, was modified by the  realism introduced by Gluck and the librettist Calzabigi in the third quarter  of the 18th century and the elimination of some practices that had become  established in spite of clear dramatic needs. By the end of the century the era  of the Italian opera seria was over, although Mozart, in 1791, could set  a modified version of Metastasio’s La clemenza di Tito (‘The Clemency of  Titus’), first used by Caldara in 1734, for a coronation performance in Prague.


Opéra-ballet:

French opéra-ballet flourished in the  first three-quarters of the 18th century and combined elements of opera and  ballet in a work that might or might not be unified by plot. A well-known  example is Rameau’s episodic Les Indes galantes (‘The Galant Indies’),  staged in Paris in 1735.


Operetta:

Operetta is light opera, a form that came  into its own in the second half of the 19th century. Its provenance is usually  considered to be Paris, where Offenbach was at work, followed soon by Vienna,  with Johann Strauss II, Suppé, Ziehrer and later generations, who included  Franz Lehár and Emmerich Kálmán. The English counterpart is found in the  operettas of Gilbert and Sullivan. Although these last keep some place in  national repertoire, where they have had no lasting successors, Viennese  operetta still holds its own in revival, as do some of the works of Offenbach.  Lighter musical stage works, however, have been influenced by the musical  comedy of the earlier 20th century and by the musicals that have emerged from  American influence and from the more recent developments of spectacular stage  effects in a variety of musical entertainments.


Opus:

Opus (Latin: work) is generally used in the listing of a composer’s works by opus numbers, usually abbreviated to ‘Op.’. Since the Latin plural opera would lead to unnecessary confusion it is best avoided, although the alternative ‘opuses’ remains an unsatisfactory substitute. Opus numbers are not always a guide to the date of composition or even to the date of publication.
 


Oratorio:

Originating in works of religious content,  generally unstaged, for the edification of those associated with the Oratorian  movement of St Philip Neri in later 16th-century Rome, the oratorio has some  claim to inclusion in a consideration of opera through the staging in Rome in  1600 of Cavalieri’s Rappresentatione di anima e di corpo (‘Representation  of Soul and Body’), which combines elements of a medieval morality play with the  new dramatic music of the period. For some this was regarded as the first opera  of all. In both its Italian and, with Handel, its English form, oratorio  continued to have a strong musical and often dramatic connection with opera,  although designed for unstaged performance.


Orchestra:

The orchestra, the dancing place of the ancient Greek theatre, came, in the early 18th century, to mean a group of instrumental performers of varied number (although this meaning still met with objections at the time). The size and composition of the orchestra has differed from century to century, but during the course of the 17th century the string section developed as a five-part and later as a four-part section: first violins, second violins, violas, and cellos and double basses, the last two playing the same part (although the double basses would sound an octave lower). In the later 18th century it became usual to have in the orchestra an additional pair of French horns and a pair of oboes, doubling flute as necessary, with a bassoon doubling the bass. By the end of the 18th century a larger ensemble that included when necessary a pair of trumpets and drums was usual. In the 19th century clarinets, already used occasionally by Mozart and Haydn, became a regular part of the woodwind section, in addition to flutes, oboes and bassoons. The brass section came to include trombones, instruments earlier used for special purposes only, as well as trumpets, to be extended to instruments of lower range during the century. The 20th century brought an extension of the percussion section. The number of players involved in a full symphony orchestra has grown very considerably, to over 60 string players and a possible 40 or more wind and percussion players. This compares with Mozart’s Salzburg orchestra of 23 string players and a dozen or so wind players, and the orchestras of less prosperous princedoms, which might employ much smaller forces, of a dozen or fewer string players and four or five wind players.


Orchestration:

Orchestration is the art of arranging music for the orchestra or the way in which this is done.


Organ:

The organ is a keyboard instrument in which  the sound is produced by air passing through pipes of various size and  construction to give a wide variety of pitches and timbres. The instrument has  its probable Western origin in the Hellenistic period, with the water-organ of  Alexandria. Varying in size and mechanical efficiency, the organ had by the  later 17th century given rise to an important school of performance, leading  directly to the achievement of Johann Sebastian Bach in the first half of the  18th century. Technical developments have taken place since then, giving still  greater versatility to the ‘king of instruments’.


Ostinato:

Ostinato (Italian: obstinate) indicates a part that repeats the same rhythm or melodic element. The basso ostinato or ostinato bass occurs in Baroque arias where a melody is set over a repeated bass pattern. Ostinato is used by the Bavarian composer Carl Orff in his instrumental teaching methods, where it may form a basis for improvisation by pupils.


Overture:

The overture (= French: Ouverture;  German: Ouvertüre) is, in opera, the music, generally instrumental, that  opens a work. The word itself was used in the early 18th century as a title for  an instrumental suite and from the 19th century as the designation of a form of  instrumental concert-piece, often with narrative or descriptive extra-musical  associations. A broad distinction may be made between the Baroque French  overture of Lully, with its opening, stately dotted rhythms and following  fugue, and the Italian overture of Alessandro Scarlatti, the sinfonia avanti  l’opera (symphony before the opera), from which the three-movement Italian  symphony was derived. While early overtures may be little more than an instrumental  call to attention, a sign that the opera is about to start, and many  18th-century overtures may have little relevance to what follows, later  composers tended, more and more, to relate the overture, thematically or in  mood, to the work that was to follow.


Parlando:

The direction parlando (speaking)  indicates that a singer should use a speaking style of delivery.


Part:

A part may indicate the line or music intended for a particular performer. Earlier choral music, for example, was written in separate part-books, one for each part (as is the modern practice with orchestral parts), rather than in the full vocal score now usual. The art of part-writing—or, in American, voice-leading—is the art of writing simultaneous parts according to the established rules of harmony. A part-song is a vocal work in which different voices are used, as distinct from a song in which all sing the same melody. 


Partita:

Partita is another word for suite, used, for example, by J.S. Bach in the title of a set of keyboard suites or in the three partitas for unaccompanied violin.


Passacaglia:

The passacaglia is a Baroque dance variation form on a short melodic formula usually occurring in the bass. It is similar in form to the chaconne, in which a recurrent bass pattern forms the basis of the composition, implying a recurrent harmonic progression. The two forms are sometimes confused by composers. Famous examples of the passacaglia include Johann Sebastian Bach’s C minor Passacaglia for the organ. Something of the form appears in the last movement of the Fourth Symphony of Brahms, and they occur in Berg’s opera Wozzeck and in Britten’s opera Peter Grimes.


Passion:

The four accounts of the suffering and death of Christ, as given in the first four books of the New Testament, were customarily sung during the Catholic rites of Holy Week to plainchant, with a division of parts where direct speech is involved. It became customary in the 15th century to allow the singing of the parts of the crowd (= Latin: turba) in the biblical narrative in polyphonic settings, and there was a gradual extension of the polyphonic element in the next century. The best-known settings of the Passion are the surviving Lutheran settings by J.S. Bach of the accounts of the Passion in the Gospels of St Matthew and St John.


Pasticcio:

A pasticcio (= French: pastiche)  is an opera that makes use of arias and other musical elements drawn from a  number of different sources. The practice of concocting such works, a procedure  that brought obvious advantages, became current in the second half of the 17th  century and continued at least until the end of the 18th century.


Pastorale:

Pastorale is a musical expression of a genre familiar in European literature from Hellenistic times or earlier, an idealisation of the rural, in literary form, in the lives and loves (often fatal) of shepherds and shepherdesses, and then, by extension, of the country in general. The word may be used as the title of a piece of music suggesting a rural idyll. In Italy it was associated particularly with the dance-form the siciliano, used to suggest the scene of shepherds in the fields near Bethlehem at the birth of Christ. Such pastoral movements formed part of the Christmas concertos of Corelli and his contemporaries and imitators. Adjectivally used, the ‘Pastoral’ Symphony of Beethoven, in true Wordsworthian fashion, offers emotions experienced on a visit to the country, recollected in what passed for tranquillity in his life.



Pavan:

The pavan (= French: pavane), a stately duple-metre dance of the 16th and early 17th centuries, appears in various English spellings: paven, pavin and other forms. Coupled with the quicker triple-metre galliard, it was among the most popular dances of the time. The origin of the word is attributed either to the Italian town of Padua or to the peacock (= Italian: pavone). Well-known examples include the English composer John Dowland’s Lachrimae, or Seaven Teares Figured in Seaven Passionate Pavans or Ravel’s nostalgic Pavane pour une infante défunte (‘Pavan for a Dead Infanta’).


Pentatonic:

The pentatonic or five-note scale is formed by the black notes of the keyboard, or the white notes C, D, E, G and A: two whole tones, a minor third and a whole tone. This form of scale is the basis of folk melodies in many countries, from China to Scotland, and occasionally occurs, in passing at least, in the work of 20th-century composers. It is an important element in the educational music of Carl Orff and in the choral method of the Hungarian composer Zoltán Kodály.


Percussion:

The percussion section of the orchestra includes all instruments that are played by being struck, including the piano and celesta. Originally consisting of a pair of kettledrums or timpani, appearing normally with a pair of trumpets, the percussion section was significantly enlarged in the later 18th century with the allegedly Turkish fashion of the time, involving the occasional use of bass drum, cymbals and triangle in an imitation of the Janissary band. Liszt shocked audiences by including a triangle in the orchestration of a piano concerto (dubbed a triangle concerto by a hostile critic), and gradually other percussion instruments were added for occasional effects, including even, by Erik Satie, the typewriter.


Performance practice:

Performance practice or performing practice (= German: Aufführungspraxis) indicates the attempt to perform music in the way envisaged originally by the composer. The second half of the 20th century has brought a significant interest in musicology as well as the technology and scholarship necessary to the construction of copies of earlier instruments and to the study of methods of performance on these instruments. The study of performance practice extends from the study of music of the earliest periods to that of relatively recent periods in the 19th and early 20th century.


Philharmonic:

The adjective philharmonic and noun philharmonia are generally used as adopted titles by orchestras or by music-loving societies of one sort or another. The words have no other technical meaning.


Phrase:

A phrase in music, on the analogy of syntactical use, is a recognisable musical unit, generally ending in a cadence of some kind, and forming part of a period or sentence. Phrasing in performance has a less precise use, indicating the correct grouping of notes, whether as phrases in the technical sense or in smaller distinct units, corresponding to the various possible syntactical uses of punctuation.


Piano:

Piano (Italian: soft) is generally represented by the letter p in directions to performers. Pianissimo, represented by pp, means very soft. Addition of further letters p indicates greater degrees of softness, as in Tchaikovsky’s Sixth Symphony, where an excessive pppppp is used.


Piano trio, quartet, quintet:

Piano trio, piano quartet and piano quintet indicate works for the piano with varying numbers of string instruments. The piano trio is scored for piano, violin and cello, the piano quartet for piano, violin, viola and cello, and the piano quintet for piano, two violins, viola and cello.


Pianoforte:

The pianoforte, known generally as the piano, was developed during the 18th century. A keyboard instrument, it is distinguished from the harpsichord by its hammer action, with hammers striking the strings when keys are depressed. Dynamic change is possible by applying more or less force to the keys. The instrument underwent a number of technical changes during the century and in the years following became the most popular instrument of domestic entertainment.


Piccolo:

The piccolo (Italian: small) is the small flute, pitched an octave higher than the ordinary flute. Adjectivally the word may be applied to other instruments or groups, as in coro piccolo (‘small chorus’). The violino piccolo, a small violin, is used by J.S. Bach in the First ‘Brandenburg’ Concerto, where it is to be tuned a third higher. 


Pitch:

The pitch of a note accords  to the frequency of its vibrations. The exact pitch of notes has varied over  the years and nowadays differs to some extent between continent and continent  or even between orchestra and orchestra. Earlier  pitches were generally lower, but not necessarily standardised. ‘Perfect pitch’  is the ability to distinguish the pitch of a note, according to generally  accepted nomenclature. Relative pitch is the ability to distinguish the pitch  of one note with relation to another, given note.


Più:

Più (Italian: more) is found in directions to performers, as in più forte (‘louder’) or più lento (‘slower’). 


Pizzicato:

Pizzicato (Italian: plucked) is a direction to performers on string instruments to pluck the strings. A return to the use of the bow is indicated by the word arco, bow. Pizzicato notes on the violin, viola and cello are normally plucked with the index finger of the right hand. The great violinist Paganini, however, introduced the technique of left-hand pizzicato for occasional use, notably in one of the variations of his 24th Caprice, where it produces a very special effect.


Plainchant:

Plainchant is the traditional monodic chant of the Catholic and Eastern Christian liturgies. It is often known as Gregorian chant, after Pope Gregory the Great, St Gregory, who largely but not completely standardised plainchant in Western Europe at the end of the sixth century. This form of chant is free in rhythm, following the words of the liturgical texts, and is modal, using the scales of the eight church modes. In its long history it has undergone various reforms, revisions and attempts at restoration.


Poco:

Poco (Italian: little) is found in directions to performers, as in poco allegro (although un poco allegro, ‘a little fast’, would be more accurate). Poco, in fact, is commonly used meaning un poco (‘a little’).


Polacca:

Polacca (‘Polish’), appears often in the phrase Alla polacca (‘in the Polish manner’), as in the last movement of the First ‘Brandenburg’ Concerto of Johann Sebastian Bach.


Polka:

The polka, a Bohemian dance, became one of the most popular ballroom dances of the 19th century, its title a possible reference to Poland. It is used by Smetana in his Czech opera The Bartered Bride and elsewhere, and in William Walton’s jeu d’esprit Façade.


Polonaise:

The polonaise is a Polish dance in triple metre. Although the title is found in J.S. Bach’s French Suite No. 6 and elsewhere in the earlier 18th century, the form is best known from the piano pieces written by Chopin a hundred years later, works that elevated the original dance to a higher level while capturing the current spirit of Polish nationalism.


Polyphony:

Polyphony is the writing of music in many parts or in more than one part, with reference in particular to contrapuntal practices. Monody or monophony are possible opposites.


Post horn:

The post horn is a relatively simple kind of horn once played by postilions as a signal of the departure, arrival or approach of a coach. Mozart made brief use of the instrument in his Post Horn Serenade, and its sound was imitated by various composers, including J.S. Bach in his harpsichord Capriccio on the Departure of His Beloved Brother, which includes a Postilion Aria and a fugue on the sound of the post horn.


Postlude:

A postlude is played at the end of a piece and indicates, in particular, the additional piano phrases that may appear at the end of a song, after the singer has stopped. The word is more widely used to describe the closing section of a work or to indicate a piece of music to be played as the conclusion of a ceremony (the opposite of a prelude).


Preghiera:

The preghiera (prayer; = French: prière)  has found a poignant place in opera, as in Desdemona’s prayer in both Rossini’s  and Verdi’s Otello. The Gebet is its counterpart in German opera,  in the work of Wagner and others.


Prelude:

A prelude (= Latin: praeludium, praeambulum; French: prélude; German: Vorspiel) is a movement or section of a work that comes before another movement or section of a work, although the word has also been used for short independent pieces that may stand alone, or even for more extended works, such as Debussy’s Prélude à l’après-midi d’un faune.


Presto:

Presto (Italian: fast) is used frequently as a direction to performers. An even faster speed is indicated by the superlative prestissimo or even il più presto possible (‘as fast as possible’). 


Prima donna:

The prima donna is the first lady in  an opera, with rights and privileges that she has traditionally used every way  of ensuring.


Primo uomo:

The primo uomo is the first man,  usually a castrato, in 18th-century opera, of similar or greater importance  than the prima donna and capable of taking equal measures in support of  his claims.


Programme music:

Programme music is music that has a narrative or descriptive extra-musical content. Music of this kind has a long history, but the term programme music was coined by Liszt, whose symphonic poems principally attempt to translate into musical terms works of literature, such as Goethe’s Faust or Dante’s Divina Commedia. It seems preferable that the term should be limited to instrumental music for concert use and should not include either incidental music or ballet music. 


Psalm:

Psalms are the texts included in the biblical Book of Psalms and retain an important place in the services of the Catholic Divine Office, sung to plainchant. The biblical texts are not metrical and therefore use a relatively simple form of chant that can be expanded by the use of a longerreciting note, the final syllables sung to a short syllabic formula. After the Reformation of the early 16th century metrical versions of the Psalms became current, with texts that could be sung to hymn tunes. Harmonised settings of the biblical and metrical Psalms have been current in Protestant churches and chapels since the 16th century.


Quarter-tone:

Divisions of the tone smaller than a semitone are occasionally found in art-music, particularly in the 20th century. Quarter-tones occur in the solo violin part of the Second Violin Concerto of Béla Bartók.


Quartet:

A quartet is a composition for four players or the name for a group of four players.


Querelle des Bouffons:

The Querelle des Bouffons (quarrel of the  comedians) was the quarrel between supporters of the French and the Italian  forms of opera in Paris in the early 1750s, particularly following the  performance there of Pergolesi’s La serva padrona (‘The Servant as  Mistress’) and a series of other works of similar provenance. The dispute had  political significance, as the King was identified with traditional French  opera, which had always had its own dynastic purposes. Matters were, for the  moment, resolved with the departure from the Paris Opéra of the Italian company  engaged there, after a successful stay of some 20 months.


Quintet:

A quintet is a composition for five players or the name for a group of five players.


Quodlibet:

A quodlibet (Latin: what you please) is a light-hearted composition generally containing a combination of well-known tunes. There is an example in Johann Sebastian Bach’s Goldberg Variations, where the composer combines the theme of the variations with two popular songs of the time.


Rappresentazione sacra:

The rappresentazione sacra (sacred  drama) had its origins in medieval Italy, further developed in the 15th and  16th centuries and revived by Cavalieri in 1600 with his Rappresentatione di  anima e di corpo (‘Representation of Soul and Body’) for the Oratorian movement.  The genre has brought its modern revival in Pizzetti’s La sacra  rappresentazione di Abram e d’Isaac (‘The Miracle Play of Abraham and Isaac’)  and other works of the 20th century.


Recitative:

Recitative is a form of musically notated  dramatic speech, relatively free in form. Early recitative of the 17th century,  with its origin in rhetorical theory and practice, allowed a greater variety of  expression than the more formal recitative of the 18th century or later.  Recitative became formally distinguished from the aria, the set song, which it  frames, and came generally to carry the dramatic dialogue of a plot. By the  early 18th century recitative was largely stylised, with a conventional chordal  accompaniment, usually provided on a keyboard instrument.


Recitativo accompagnato:

Recitativo accompagnato (accompanied  recitative) or recitativo stromentato (recitative with instruments) is  recitative with an orchestral accompaniment.


Recitativo secco:

Recitativo secco (dry  recitative) or recitativo semplice (simple recitative) is accompanied  only by a keyboard or other chordal instrument in the form of a basso  continuo.


Recorder:

The recorder (= German: Blockflöte; French: flûte à bec; Italian: flauto dolce), the straight flute, exists in a variety of sizes, the principal of which are the descant or soprano, the treble or alto, the tenor and the bass, the first and third of which have a range upwards from C and the second and fourth of which have a range upwards from F, with similar fingering. Other sizes of recorder include the smallest, the sopranino (an octave higher than the treble) and the great bass (an octave lower than the tenor). An even larger family of recorders existed in the later 16th century. The earlier recorder was used in consort music, while it was used rather as a solo instrument in music in the later 17th and early 18th centuries, with sonatas for the instrument by Handel and solo parts in the Second and Fourth of the ‘Brandenburg’ Concertos of J.S. Bach. The revival of the instrument in the 20th century has led to a number of new solo works for recorder.


Reed:

Reeds, made either from traditional material or from plastic or metal, are used to produce a musical sound from their vibration by means of an air column. The clarinet uses a single reed, fastened to a hollow mouthpiece, while the oboe and bassoon use a double reed, one side vibrating against the other. The reed-pipes of the organ are generally made of metal, with a thin vibrating tongue to produce the sound. Similar laminae are used in the mouth-organ and harmonica. Some instruments, like the bagpipes or the crumhorn, use covered double reeds, set inside an air chamber.


Register:

The register of a voice or instrument is a distinct part of its range. The clarinet, for example, has a distinctive lower register known, from the origin of the instrument, as the chalumeau register, and an upper register of more flute-like timbre.


Registration:

Registration is the choice of stops used by an organist or harpsichordist (a much more elaborate matter for the former).


Repetiteur:

The repetiteur or répétiteur is the  musician employed to teach singers their parts and to accompany and advise them  in rehearsal. Both musical and linguistic skills are needed for this sometimes  demanding task.


Requiem Mass:

The Catholic Mass for the Dead opens with the words Requiem aeternam dona eis, Domine (‘Eternal rest grant unto them, O Lord’), leading to the use of the word Requiem to denote a Mass for the Dead. Important settings of the Requiem include that by Mozart and the large-scale settings of the Requiem by Berlioz and Verdi. Brahms set a collection of Lutheran texts to form his A German Requiem, while Fauré set a liturgical text that used parts of the burial service.


Rescue opera:

The term ‘rescue opera’ has been used to  describe operas such as Beethoven’s Fidelio, dealing with the subject of  rescue, particularly, after 1789, from political victimisation.


Rhapsody:

The title rhapsody (= French: rapsodie) came into general use in music of the mid-19th century, notably with the Hungarian Rhapsodies of Liszt. It implies a work free in form and inspiration, often an expression of national temperament, as in the Slavonic Rhapsodies of Dvořák and the Rapsodie espagnole of Ravel.


Rhythm:

Rhythm, an essential element in music in one way or another, is the arrangement of notes according to their relative duration and relative accentuation.


Rigaudon:

The rigaudon, a French folk-dance, is occasionally found in instrumental dance suites of the 17th and 18th centuries. It is normally in a brisk duple metre.


Ritardando:

Ritardando (Italian: becoming slower), abbreviated often to rit., is frequently used as a direction to players.


Ritenuto:

Ritenuto (Italian: held back) directs a player to slow down at once.


Ritornello:

The ritornello, a recurrent phrase or passage, is a feature of the Baroque, where an aria may be punctuated by the return of a short instrumental phrase. It became a frequent element in Baroque solo concertos by composers such as Vivaldi and works with operatic connotations.


Rococo:

Rococo, a term borrowed, as are so many other terms in musicology, from architecture and the visual arts, is used in particular to describe the light decorative French style as found in the work of Couperin and Rameau in the first half of the 18th century.


Romanticism:

Romanticism in cultural history is a word that defies precise definition. In music it is most commonly applied to a period or the predominant features of that period, from the early 19th century until the early 20th. Features of Romanticism in music include an attention to feeling rather than to formal symmetry, expressed in a freer use of traditional forms, an expansion of the instrumental resources of music, and an extension of harmonic language. Influenced particularly by the arts of literature and painting, music also reflected other preoccupations, often the remote and exotic (whether historical or geographical or both). Early German Romantic opera, for example, is exemplified by Weber’s Der Freischütz, its plot involving woodmen and huntsmen and the mysterious midnight magic of the forest.


Rondo:

Rondo (= French: rondeau) form involves the use of a recurrent theme between a series of varied episodes. The rapid final movement of a Classical concerto or symphony is often in rondo form.


Rubato:

Rubato (Italian: stolen) is a direction to the player to employ a measure of freedom in performance. The phrase tempo rubato is also found.


Sacred opera:

‘Sacred opera’ simply indicates opera on a  religious subject and may range from Cavalieri’s Rappresentatione di anima e  di corpo (‘Representation of Soul and Body’) to Wagner’s Parsifal. It  is not, however, an established category of opera, merely a descriptive term  which may have occasional use.


Sarabande:

The sarabande is a slow dance in triple metre, generally found in the Baroque instrumental suite. The dance seems to have been Latin American in origin, imported from Latin America to Spain in the 16th century.


Saxophone:

The saxophone, a single-reed instrument, was invented in the middle of the 19th century by Adolphe Sax. It is used widely in jazz, and has never been a permanent member of the symphony orchestra. Notable use is made of the saxophone by Ravel in his Boléro and in his orchestration of Mussorgsky’s Pictures at an Exhibition; other composers have also used the instrument for special effects.


Scale:

A scale is a sequence of notes placed in ascending or descending order by step.


Scena:

In 19th-century opera a scena is a  dramatic scene that leads, in one way or another, to an aria or duet or more  formal movement.


Scene:

As part of an act, a scene may simply mark  the arrival of a new character or indicate a dramatic division, with a possible  change of ‘scene’ or place.


Scherzo:

A scherzo is a light-hearted movement found from the early 17th century in various forms but used by Beethoven as an alternative to the minuet in symphonies, sonatas and other instrumental works. Chopin expanded the form considerably. The diminutive scherzino or scherzetto is occasionally found, while scherzando occurs as a direction to performers. The scherzo, like the minuet, is generally used to frame a trio section of contrasted material.


Score:

A musical score is written music that shows all parts. A conductor’s score, for example, may have as many as 30 different simultaneous instrumental parts on one page, normally having the woodwind at the top, followed below by the brass, the percussion and the strings. A distinction is made between a vocal score, which gives voice parts with a simplified two-stave version of any instrumental parts, and a full score, which includes all vocal and instrumental parts generally on separate staves. To score a work is to write it out in score. A symphony, for example, might be sketched in short score, on two staves, and later orchestrated or scored for the required instruments.


Seguidilla:

The seguidilla or seguidillas is a fairly quick triple-metre Spanish dance. There is a famous imitation of the form in Carmen’s seguidilla in the first act of Bizet’s opera Carmen. 


Semi-opera:

While formal opera was slow  to find a place in England, the semi-opera, a modern term describing a form of  the later 17th century, allowed an amalgamation of a strong musical  element with spoken drama. This is exemplified  in works such as King  Arthur by  Purcell, with text by Dryden, in which music distinguishes spirits, magicians  and goblins from the more human protagonist and his heroine.


Sempre:

Sempre (Italian: always) is found in directions to performers, as in sempre piano (‘always soft’).


Senza:

Senza (Italian: without) is found in directions to performers, particularly in phrases such as senza sordino (‘without mute’).


Septet:

A septet is a composition for seven players or the name for a group of seven players. 


Serenade:

A serenade (= German: Serenade, Ständchen) is often similar in form to the divertimento. Etymologically a piece for evening performance, usually outdoors, the counterpart of the morning aubade, the title came to have a much more general meaning. However, it often suggests a piece of music in honour of someone or something, an extension of the traditional performance of a lover beneath the window of his mistress.


